Cttbist painting, ;tS described in the epigraphs to this chapter, not only fi:acnored the single viewpoint bur also placed disparate objects on the same spar.ial plane, adjacent and simultaneo\o s. In striking contrast to the many modes of representation that shattered the li:x:ity of single-point perspective, the media of 6Jm and televisioo- io their dominant forms through most of the twentieth century-were viewed ino a single frame, seen on a siogle screen. Variations of scale, position, and camera angle from shot to shot roay alter the positioned fixity of the camera's view, but these shifts in "pe.rspcetive" are sequential and do not occur on the same picture plane as in cubist painting, chronophotogrophy, or dadaist collage.' As moving images follow each other in sequence-frame-by- frame, shot-by-shot-they are held within the fixed fr·me of a screen, a surface that holds its constancy regardless of the contiJ>Uous or radically discontinuous spatial and temporal relation betweeo shots. In t.h.is way, the prevailing form:lt for moving-image media did not follow literary, painterly, or even architecnmJ challenges to the perspectival frame but held on much longer to the strictures of its "symboijc form ~ J n t.he century-loog history o.f film and thc half-century-long history of tclevis.ion, there are only limited examples of either multiple-screen display or multiple- screen composition within the single frame 3 That is, until recendy. With the advent of digital imaging technologies and new tech nologies of display in the 1990s, rl1e media "window" began to follow JYainting's and architecture's lead in tbe. challenge to a fixed perspective. Hyperboles invite a challenge: there were, of course, exceptions to rhe dominant si1\gle-frame, single-screen P'dr'Jdigm. Experiments by filmmakers who toyed with layers of superimposition, split screens, and multiple- screen projections- fro m Richter to R11ttman, from Brakhage to Warhol, trom Abel Gauc.e to Charles and Ray Eames, from Zbigniew Rybczynski to Mike Figgis-provide a catalog of resistance to ~be dominant form of screenic display. ' But these exceptions also prove the rule. T11e rapid and recent remaking of cinematic, relevisual, and computer-based torms of imaging and display force us to note, in retrospect, the remarkable historical domi.nao1ce of the siogle-irnage, siogle-frame paradigm as an intrdnsigent visual practice. Tb.e tclevisual image largely followed the cinema's conventions of a single-screen fo rmat and sequential fiow, but ooce the televisual apporacus became a multiple-channel receive( wiru the capacity for switching channels at will, aided and accelerated by a remote-control device, television added a new axis of spatial and temporal depth to the cinema's fixed sequentiality.

5

FROM SEQUENCE TO MULTIPLICITY'

The armchair televisual viewer is a mo11tllgist, composing a sequenced '~cw
from a database of channels and deliver y formats, a random set of synchronic
5

CHA PTER

a1ternarives to rhe single-screen vit"'v. AJ'Id as rece nt relevisual features (program· ning style elutte.red with text crawls and inset li1Ulles; monitors enabled with "picttu·e· in· picrure· display) facilitate mul·

tiple-screcn insets, televisual "1vindows" have be· come multiple and simultaneous receivers of a v:u-iety of programming.' In the short span of the last two decades, the introduction of computcr·generatcd imab>cs and digital display technologies has radically trans· formed the space of the screen 5 Before digi tal imaging, the virtuality of representariM was mea· sured in brushstrokes, by the use of color ;tnd shadow, and was eased by perspectival techniques, by drawing aids like the crunera obscura, and by
v~uying

J evels of arrisdc skill. DigitaJ imaging

technologies not only make it easie.r to conduct "cur-ups" and coUages, to conSU'Uct seamless sub· stitutions and simulation effects, bur also ease the use of inset framing devices, to facilitate multiple ·,_,~ndowed" sc.reens. Digital multiples ru-e readily cloned and easily deployed; gravity-de tying digital effects change the physical and temporal laws of the computer-rendered enviromnenc. lf the digit:U image is posrphotographic; the digital movingimage is postcinem~ltic.6 A.nd yet the markers of these changes arc recent. As J will describe in this chapter, they have emerged alongside rhe developing display inre1 i'1Ce of tJ,. compurer screen. The "graphical user interfacer- (cur) transformed the computer screen from a surface with glowing symbols and text to one

wlli.ch displayed icons and, later, digital images. 'rhe cu1 display ir1troduced an entirely new visual
sysrern- a text or image in 0 11e ..wind0\"- meeciog
1,

other

tex[S or

images in other ··windows" on the

same screen. The multiple framed images of Muys..a Screen s:hm, <:Qmputcr windnw with W.odows.. bridge (seen in sequence) and the silkscreen multir >les of Andy Warhol (seen tn repetition) col'ltaintd images that exist in relation to each other, whereas the "windows" of the computer may not. Cinema and
T.HE MULTIPLE

television scree.ns, the once sacrosanct domain of the.single irn .age, have been invaded by text crawls, inset screens, pop- up windows. Multiple-frame images
are a readable new visual syntax, a key feature in the contemporary remaking of

a viso.al vernacular.
If we follow Pauofskjls assertion that perspective was a "symbolic form"a way of apprehending the world through a rnental apparatus-then the representational postulates of perspecti,,e have met their end on the computer screen. And, if we accept Panofsky's further argument th,tt perception is conditioned by representational habits, then our new mode of perception is multiple and fractured. It is "postperspectival" -no longer framed in :1 sirtgle image with fixed centta.liry; "postcinematic1'- no lo·nger projected onto a screen surface as were the camera obscura or magic lantern; "post-televisual"-no longer unidirectional in the model of sender and receiver.
THE MOVING I MAGE AND THE MU LTIPLE F RAM E IN FILM AND TELEVISION

Painters had dist(}f)ent/ t.lx11" tme observ.atio11 point, in p1:te ofemphmis by distor-

19-t

I

tio11. ·was not Sl-f!Jidml to give the spotitll t:JJtn(tJ oftha oi?J.cct . . . . PainrctS shifted the poiot of vision into a kind of cine.matO !,'l'apbjc sequence, and r eprese11ted tl)C projection of se\'eraL points of view in one picttLcc.

-<:;yorgy Kepes, La><gtmgt ojflisir m (emphasis added)
The tp«Mti.Jr iJ n.otj ust· r&tp(ftiJiw /() whlit i.s mavi.ng hut al.to to what ftll)'i i.n place,

and tbt peruption oftM'lli::ment suppose::sfiwdframes. -Pierre Franco.su·l, "Espace e.c illusion"

A' Gyorgy Kepes suggests in the above epigraph , i.u the single-spatial plane of
cubist painting, "Painters shift£d t he poin t of vision ioto a .kind of ciuematograpltic.sequenc-e, and represented the projection of several points of view in one picrurc."' Kepes's introduction of the cinematic. metaphor descr<bc.s the stutw ·i ng representation of movement , a "ciuemarographic sequence" seen arrayed on one spatial plane, as well as the polyscenic, multiple time-frame found in cubist and futurist paint< ngs such as Picasso's Les dtm.oisdles d'.tlvigno11 (1907), Giacomo Balla's Dynamism ifa Dog t711 a Lcruh (1912), and Marcel Ouch amp's Nude DeJcemli11g a Stairaue, No. 2 (1912). Pierre Francastcl reminds us of another aspect of the cinematographic seqttencc, one. that remai ns <nsistent through most of the cinematic century: the perceptiorl of cinematic movement "supposes" tbe fixed frame of d1e scceen.s

CHA PT ER

5

THE SIN GLE F RAME, THE SINGLE SCREEN

In Charles Mussels account, the "~jsrory of screen practice" was marked by several major technological transfonnations: the devclopmenr of the magic lantern in che r6sos, the adapt~rion of photogrnph.ic sUdes for projtction arou nd rSso, and rhe proje..'tion of chrono-phorographic images around 18<);.' These technical turning poims in the emergence of a "sc~een practice" mark the addirion of photography to
magic Lan tern projection. Yet an examinado n of

the emerging cultural practi=< of image projection will ;\lso indicate what remained constant during these changes: viewers fAced projected images on a screen, and most comtnonly, rhese images \\'ere projected se<tnentially rather rhan arrayed adjace.ntly.J·, This practice was not dcrc:rmi ned by the Umits of existing techno.logy but, instead, by the representational co,wenfion of the single image in a single frame. Multiple lantems were routindy used by phantasmagoria exhibitors to create composite ellects; two projectors could have been placed side by side liom the earliest mome11ts of
screen practice. Although the popular mid-nineteenth-century

term for slide projection-the "stercopticon"might seem to indicate a S}"Stem for two-slide
projecrion, the ternt was adapted becau..~ of the

co1runon practice of transferring stereoscope views

ro grow1d glass, cutting the doubl.e im~ge in hill; and selling them separarely as lantern slides." Even beforo lantern slide images began ro rely on photography arotmd 185o, dte prevailing exhibition practice was to project sing!"" frame images despite discontinuities in the image (its angle, its distance)
as slides were projectet.~ in seque·1 ce. 11

Fig. $·.

5.4

.MaJdcn Bl·Unial bntcm.. fn >m W. J. Clu..·hrick,. TM ~\-lagit

Lurt.Nrn t\<LmHill(l.<>ndort: Frederick Wamt, :SjS).

As an exemplaryindication of late- nineteenrhcentut)' magic lantern technique, the 1878 handbook Tbe Mag~ Lantm1 ivfamMI details a variety of la mern types and instruction~ for their use. Its author

describes the <>peration of the Malden Bi- Unial La11tei'll (figure 5.4): "[it] combines two lanterns i11 Me, having rhejr optical systems placed one ove1· the orher.

T HE MULT IPLE

This form of Dissolving View seems the one most in general use at the present 6me."" The "Bi-Unial" lautern h;\d two separate optical systems and technically could have projected images in multiple array. Instead, the standard practice iovoh·ed 1rsi.ng the two lenses to d issolve between images-one on top of the other - in the appearance of a single frame. In this regard, the emerging use of projected lameru slides in art history lectures formed an important contrast to the predominant forms of latenineteenth-century entertainment and the emerging fo rmat for movu1g images. The com parative method of the double-slide lecture became one of the pedagogical mainstays of Gennan art historian Heinrich Wolffiin soon after he began r.o lecture at the University of Berlin ul 1901. \· VO!IHin's predecessor at the Uo.iversiry of Berlin, Hermann Grimm, had used slides extensively in his lectures in the late 189os. Wolffiin began co use two slide projectors, arranged side by side, so that he could compare different images or show details alongside the principal image. The usc of double-slide projection allowed the viewer co consider one image in relation to another image- to compare an image t.o one oi an earlier time, to a closer detail, to a contrasting style. T he conclusions drawn from this metl1od were comparative and analytic."' By contrast, the emerging mode of moving- image projection retauled the singularity of one image, one scre-en. As lantern images were projected in increasingly rapid succession (with appaT"dtuses like L. S. Bcal's r866 choreuroscope or Coleman Sellets's r86r kinemaro&ope, or Muybridge's r88o photographicbased 7 .oopraxiscope), images were projected in seqllential dissolve.'" Between r896 and r9oo, many different inventor$, manufa.cn.lre.rs, filmmakers, exhibitors, and entrepreneurs struggled to define the format and venue ior moving images, but there was a remarkable consistency in tbe for m of single-screen projection.'· The technical systems for projection available by 1896-the Lumieres' C inemarographe, R. W. Paul's animarographe and 'llreatrograph, Jenkins and fumat's Phaotoscope, Edison's Vitascope, but also Lyman H . Howe's anitnotoscope, W. Watson's motograph, \1\fj)Jjam Paley's kalatccl.noscope, Hennan Casler's Biograph, C harles Urban's bioscope, and Latham's eidoloscope- all had different CaJYabilities and relie.d on dilfercnt patents and construction, but they had one oommon element: :llll projected single-screen images, seen in a single frame." Even so, the many systems for exhibiting moving images demonstrated the uncertainty about what the predominant form of d1e medium would be. At dre Paris r9oo Exhibition, Raoul Grimoin-Sanson's ten-projector Cineorama provided spectators witb an unframed 36o -degrce view of projected moving cmages,

1il

CHAPT£R

5

while the Lumieres' Grand Ecran/CiMmarographe G~anr projected a program of films and color slides onto an immense screen thar could be viewed ii·om bo th sid es." The size and format of single-screen projection, viewed by spectators in

fixed seats faci ng the screen, was no t yet the dominant form . T he cultural practice that emetged for d>e projectio n of moving images on a sCJ·een did nor deploy
multiple projectors but, inste<ld, cast a single image on a single screen.
TH E MOVIN G IMAGE IN A SING LE FRAME: THE COM POSITE SHOT

The first recorded moving images evidenced a broad ra nge of camera angles, camera distances, and locations-the Lumiere brothers' outdoor actunlitis of \<orkers leaving tl>e uuniere photographic plate l: ~ctory (Sortie d'u.rint. filmed directly fucing the action), the arrival of a train ar the station (Arriv.fe d'tm trai11 aLa Ciotnt, filmed fro m a dynamic diagonal angle), and the baby eating breakl:~r (Repas de btbi, film ed from a closer camera position), or the in-studio fil ms

of W. K. L. Dickson and T homas Ed ison, w hich staged action against Aat
bbck backgrounds i1 1side of the "Black lVLlria" (The Leonard-CUJhir~g Fight. filmed in. six separate onc:-minutc "rounds" for separate ten-cent kinetoscope '~ew; The Kiss; The Corbett-Corrrtuey Figbt). VJhatever the diiferences were
in the first single- shot fi lms, their action was contained wid lin the bounds of a single frame and was projected onto

a s ingle screen.
Even when ti.l.mmakers discovered rhe stop-action rrick (the camern W:lS stopped during filmi ng and a substitu tion was made before thc c:uncra com menced filmingag-.tin), this special e.Jfect relied on maintaining the continuiry of the

frame. The one-shot film The &-etutitm of Mary Quem of Sects (1895, m:1de by A rthur Clarke for the Edison M.anufacruring Company) pro,,ides a si mple ex:unple. An actor d ressed as ~cen tv.lary posed with his head on the eJtecution block, the earner~ stopped, a m;mneq11in was substituted, and rhe camera recommenced filming as the guillotine made irs cut.Tite resulting film displays the regicidal docapitation wi thin the se<:.ming continuity of one shot. T he "ontological

cut" here \11."aS invisible, in the missing time berween fr::tmes.
F ilms by Georges )\·.!<lies, Ferdinand Ze~ 'Ca, and o thers

relied on this stop-action trick to enact a new visuaJ system based on disappearances, substitutions, reappearal\ce, and the "sta.rnltss" cur.

s...s Single im~, siogk fmme: &arne enlugcmcnn fixom Lumi~rc (l(;lua/itl$. tS9S·

THE MU LT IP L E

Early filmmakers were also quick to exploit rhe po<emial of "double exposures;' exposing po rtio ns of the
fih11

more than o nce. Following the magic

lantern tradition of dissolving views bet\Vcen slides, in-camera double exposures we~e used to supply dissolve transitions between two separate "shots: Yet the resul!i.ng superimposition of two different images-a predi!,..;tal coropositing techn.ique-·would still be seen in a single !i:a.ne. By exposing only a portion of rhe film during one "take~ and another portion d\lfing a subsequent "cake;' filmmakers could also produce the effect of a split screen. Edwin S. Portc/s Tbe 1'wmti£tb Century Tramp (1902), for example, used the technique of split exposure to add the New York sl..')'line to the lower portion of the 6:-.une while the upper portion showed a "tramp" pcd"ling on a flying bicycle-contrnption above it.19 The title seems to pun o n the double meaning of "tramp"-describing
both a vagrant and an cxu1rsio n by foot -and

s.6 Spli1·:<-crcen irnagc frorn ThMntk:t6 Cen.ntr)· Tmwp, Thomas Edi.wn Company. diJo..~ by Edwin S. 1-\.rr«, t902..

implied a wild new mobility for drifters in tile t 'l.ew cennu)'· Another Edwin S. Portcrfi'hom-.< s Edison film, The Dream cja Rr~rebit Fimd(1906), relied on a similar splir-s.:-reen technique to indic"te thnr the dreamer in his bed was A ying over the city. Based on an episode of Windsor McCay's comic strip Little Nemo ;,. Sfumlmlnnd, The Drenm ofa Rllld.Jit Pit11d used a panoply of trick devices-superimpositions, stop-mo 6o n tricks, spJit . . frame supe r-

impositions- to ''i;'ttal.ize the dru nken cL·eam state resulting from overindttlgence in beer Mtd cheese rarebit. ln both of these instances, the Sj>lit
screeJl wa.c.; intended to hclp viewers visualjze a fn..nt:astical wodd by rncs hing the two p~lrts sea.rnSplil"s.::tttn ima.gto from Drihffl ~.r~~ R~trtbit Hmd. Th,mas f'.di""' ConlJ"n)\ dirtcted bj· Ed·vin S. Poncr.t9Q6.
S.7

lessly mther thm drawing rheit attention to Ute split in the fr:une of the shor.

Like the po1ysccnic p:Untc.rs of the quattrocenro, e:lrly fi.lnm-.aker s con ld

manipulate rhe spati:tl and rempora.l components of a single shot by using stopaction or splir-fra me double e.·posure, by layering rhe image into " polyscenic composite as either a direcdy visible or hidden effect. And as filrom:lkers beg-.tll to h~wc one shot foU ow another. the logic of shor- to-shot sc< rncntlalir)- dle

CHAPTER

5

ordering of images one after another, not o ne adjacent to another- became 3 ba.si.c constT'a inr of cinematic constmction. Hi,-tor; cs of film style- whether

they imply an evolutionary model, or asswne that the cincmn developed according to its essen rial characteristics, or imply a relation ro historical, cultural speci-

ficities-atl must accoum for the domin:>nce of the single-frame image.
T HE MOVING IMAGE IN A SINGLE FRAME: THE S PLI T SCREE N

Edwin S. Por 1er used a simple two·way split screen in r~x 'TWmtiRth Cmt/JY)' Tramp (1902) and Dream o/" RtmJJit Fiend (r9o6), bur the split was intended to provide a seamless rend, an early instance of a oompositi ng "special effect." I n Lois Weber and Phillips Smalley's 1913 Rex film Suspmse, the sc.rccn is visibly spUr into a triptych of three triangles, snowing rhree simultaneous

actions not sequentially, but within one frame. T he
title of the fiLn indicates its primary narrative function: 10 suspend the spectator in the midst of dr:rlmatic :1ction, uncertain of its n.a.rracive outcome. S11.rpt11se reUs at:1111iliar story, one quite common to

on:c ..rcel threat-a11d-resol\1 tion narf"Jtives: a wife is
home alone while her husband is off o n business, and a burglar nies to break into rhe house. D. W .

Griffith's r<)09 Tht Lonely Vi/lq has · nearly identical setup; but his o ne-reel n:mativc relied o n cross·
cutting--the seq uential back- and- forth between several lines of action- to build suspense: the .u~ SpliHcreen (r:une enl~emem from Susptmr, dirttted by viewer watthts the woman fretting inside her Lois \Vc:btr and Phillips SmaUt'y. 1913. Museum ofl\,lodcrn An domestic sanct\un while a menacing burglar threat· Film Libruy. ens h-om the ourside. A call 10 the husb~nd, who is far fron1 home in a third, mm-e distam sp:1ce, i oirjares :1 rush to the rescue. In The Lrmely Villa, the vicwu is Gtc.rally suspended fmm seeing develo pments io one line of action while vietving the action of the "m eanwhile." The telephone

separate spaces in simuitanc:ity:.2n In contrast; in Swpeu.tt, instead of cross- cuning between the three spaces, \'\Ieber and Smalley chose is used ro lin k
C\>vo

co portray the suspensetul narrative moment wi thin the confines of o ne sho t, 01 1<: fram e. Smpmu oflers an e-.u:ly <'.Xample of tl1c narrative fu nction of spGt· scree.n com position. The suspense occurs ·~ross the OJ'thogonals rhn divide the sho t. The spGt screen forms a bold conrra;-r to the perspectival agenda of represent· ing the near and far along the rods of dcpth . lnst.,d , it places the near and f;u

TH e M U t.TIP Lt

oo the same spatial plane, Bat and adj:~ceot, like the moment, described by McLuhan in rhe epigraph at tl1e staxt of th.is chapter, when "sequence yields to

the simulraueous, one is i.n the world of struc nue and configuration."ll
FRA M ES WITH IN FRAM ES

Doors, windv..us. hox o.ffiu ~uin.1ows, skylights, tar wi11do-'WJ, mirrors. arenilfinmes. TQ,.great tlirufon haveptwticu!ar qffi11itia wit.b pm·tirular secondary. tertim)'· etc. frames. And it iJ by this tbt><tailing of frames that the parts ofth< set or ofthc dow/
system liTe Jf"{>tl1'aled, but llin cqm;ergl and are reurtitr.d

-Gilles Oeleuze, Cinema r: The llt/01.JCmenJ·hnagt
'rH2 Cl~i"t:MA'fOG:It.AJ'QIC Ptt.'t.NClPL£ A.SO TJU, l:or..oGRAM 41

HcRts the bnnch of a cherry-tree.· And the pupil cuts oat from this whol~. with a squue, :and a circ:Jc, and · rectangk-

compositionaJ units:

Although my discussio n so far has emphasized early filmmaking and the.emerging conventions of moving- image representation, allow me to
now turn to sevc.ml contem porary French theo-

rists who have anal)'Led the preponderan ce of frame-witrun-a- frame compositions. Gilles Dcleu-te, in his first vohm1e of film rheory, Ci11mza 1: The l1 1ovcmen.t-lmage, broke the mov~

~-------------------J
He frames a ' hod
5 .9

;

i

ing image into its constituent frames" Wh.ile Deleuze's discussion of the rrame (cadre) and framing (tadmge) pivots on the polarities between the contents of the frame-full versus emp·C)',

OiagtJ.rn of 't"'llti: able fi'aming .;,f bra"o::hcs, from Sergc. i Eiseo---

rarefaction versus saturation- it is his discussion of the boundary of the frame that interests m e

S(ein, Film }?t;rm.; Euays itt Film7'heory(Ncw \·(!rls,: Hnn,'(l'lU'f, llr.ace

"''d Wo··ld, T 9<l)).

here. For DeJeuze, following Bergson, the frame is a.o "imm.obile section" that gives «f.Usc movement." As Deleuze not.es, siileot filmmakers experimented with the boundaries of the frame: "The iris metlhod in C riflith, which isolates a f.1ce first of all, then opens and shows the surroundings; Eisenstein's researches inspired by Japanese dmwing, which adapt the frA me to the theme; Gance's variable screen which opens and closes 'according to the dramatic necessities,' aod Uke a 'visual acco rdion'-from the very beginning attempts were made to test dynamic variations of rhe frame. In any case framing is Umitation.""' Dcleuze maintains tha:t rramlng detesmincs the closed system of the shot '[l] n the 6 nal analrsis, the screen, as the frame of frames, gives a common st'andard ot measurement to things which do not have one- long shots o£ the cou.n-

CNAPTER

S

try-side aud close- ups of the face, an astronomical system and a single drop of water-parts w h.icb do not have the same denominator of dismnce, relief or light. 1n all of these senses the frame insures a dererrirorializatioJt of the

of the screen-as the master fra me- translates the variables of distance and angle, light and depth, into a "common standard of
measurement to things which do not have one." Deleuze Slcpp~es a catalog of films that use inset li-ames lor dramatic. effect (Fritz Lang's fihns 1'/xmsandEyes

image~'' The container

of Dr. Mabuse and Woman in the Wi11dow a«! key examples), yet be is kee.n to
note that these compositional framing devices or partial frames still rc.m ain within the boundaries of the screen. Deleuws insistence that the screen "as the frame of ti-ames" is r.he grand denominator of what it contains supplies profou nd support for an analysis of the screen as a closed visual system. As a close coroUary to his attention to the frames within the master frame, his insighr"All framing determines an out·of·lield [ho··s-champ]"''--posilS a radical else·

where, always unseen. In a later essay, "L'ecran second, ou le rectangle au carre" (The Second Screen, or the Rect.Jngle Squared), Ch.ristian Metz also addresses the reprcscn · rational practice of using frames within frafl)es: "The film presents us with a spectacle as if through a frame, door, window, etc. which is ilSelf enframed at the same time by the rectangle of rl1e screen."',.The shot within a shot is a fa miliar figure of cinema. It plays a central role in the intrigue and continuity of cer·

I 201

min films: at the same time, it is emblem atic in the very name of these
films- Rear Window (dir. Hitchcock, t954), Secret Beyond the Door (dir. FrirL Lang, l948), Wb>nan in the Window (dir. Frit:-< Lang, t944)-in which the wirt· dow of the title is itself redoubled in the framing of a photograph and also in anotl1er film again; or tlte interior screen materializes under special variableswindshields of automobiles, a torn curtain, diJferent demarcations of the view.>' 1\Ier£ engages an arg ument roade elsewhere by film theorist Marc Verner that such secoudary framing-framing wit!hin the frame- is a self..refiexi,·e strategy engaged in the diegetization of the apparatus (diigitisntum du di'}<JSi· ti/) 2 8 While Met7!s discussion is largely devoted to the compositional mise en abyme performed by framing devices that enact a secondary screen, he con· eludes his essay with a description of the use of the spUt screen in Brian De Palma's Sistm (1973), describing how De Palma deployed this technique to present the shot and its co1mtershot simultant'Ously-'· As is evident in Metz's description of SiJtm (and as we wiU see in some of the examplcs ·discussed below), the shot-counrershot can occur in the same maste.r fram e in a multiple- frame, multiple-screen format. Separate "points of

'I'HF. M ULTlPLE

202

I

view"- of seeing and being seen- can be combined, compared, placed simulr.lneous and adjacent. In rerms of rheories of suture, replacing the sequence of shot/counte-rshot wirh chis form o f no nsequential simultaneity skews the sense that the spectator is somehow sutured into the filrn 1 between the sho~s. 30 Vi'hile the single-w-een moving image offers multiple perspectives through the 8equential shifts of montage and editi ng, the multiple-frame or multiple-screen moving image offers the same via .,dj:tccncy and contiguity.
MULTI PLI CITY: A TAXONOMY O F VARIABLES

Considering the d ifferences ben..,een the split screen (fracturing the screen within the master frame), rhe multiple fTame (frame within a fr~me), and rhe usc of multiple screens (mtJtiplying the number ofsct-eens, often reqttiring multiple projection devices), a rroronomy of variables begins to emerge, each with its own historical lineage: (t) Films that use the split screen to ,;,,idly demarcate sep:u·arc spaces, as exemplified in che split screens of Suspmse (1913) and later in Jilms such as ltsAlwa;~ Fair W eatber(t9SS), PillowTillk (1959), Grand Prix (1966), Boston Strangler (1g68), The Thomps Crown /l j foir (1968), Waodstock (1968), :md Sisters (r9n); (>) fil ms tlw use a fi1llnc-\\1thin-a-!i·amc of a master shot or nn inset screen as an elcmc.nt within. the fictional world (a "diegecizatlon of the apparatus") as round in ext~mples from Undejosbat thc Moving Picture Sh<>w (1902) ro Sherlo.:k]mJior(dir. Buster Keaton, 1924) w Purpft &se <{C,1iro (dir. Woody AJlen, 1985); (3) films that were p1 ·ojecred onto multiple screens, from Abel G:u1ce's three-projector Polyvision system tor Napolt!ou (r9z6) to rhe multlscreen

C H APTER

5

exhibits of Ray and Charles Eames; Francis T hompson and Alexander Hammid's triple-screen exhibit To Be A/iv,, at tbe 1964 New York \· Vorld's Fair and their six-screen WeAre Yqu11g at Expo '67 in Montreal; Andy Warhol's two-screen projections lm~er ar1d Outer Space (1965), Lupe (1965}, The Chelsea Girl.r (1966); and other experiments at world exhibitions like Expo '67 and by experimental filmmakers Harry Smith (four-screen Mahnga1my, I970-198o) and Sally Potter (two-screen projects Blacktmd White, 1 969, and Pia,)\ r9;r). These multiple-screen practices "expanded" cinema co venues outside of the commercial movie theater. Experiments in screen format have occ:ut'fed at critical crossroads in the history of rnoving-image technology. Eisenstein proposed a "dinamk screen"
amid the reformulation of aspect ratio in the '"~'.tkc of the late r9ws transjcion to sound. In the c.arly 1950S, in response to another set of cconomk and techno-

logical challenges to the film industry (divestiture, the commercial introduction of television), a variety of new screen formats were introduced. The expanded S<'<een aspect ratios of Cinerama aud Cinero.~Scope challenged Jilmmakers co use the e..·panded horizontal scope of the f~C.tme. Despite the following catalog of split-screen and multiple-screen projects, <these e. ' amples remain rare e.xceptlons to dornioant screen practice.
SP LIT SCREENS, MULTIPLE SCREENS
1 203

In the 1950s, filmmakers took advantage of dle new aspect ratio to divide the scrttn into component screens. In the opening prologue of 1'hiJ Is Ci11erama!, the feature-length travelogue produced for C.inerama~s initial cornmc.r dal demonstration in t95~, Lowell Thomas narrates a familiar teleology of motion picture history, tracing the desire t<> "reproduce narure" from citve paintirtgs to ro.1gic lauterus, nickelodeons and silent movie-making. As Thomas begins his account, he is seen ou a screen with the standard Academy 4:3 aspect ratio. Aud y expands its format and \videns to Cinerama's then, as the screen dramaticaU 31 wider aspect r:njo, Thomas announces: "T his is Cinerama!" Althougb the patented Cinerama process involved recording with a tbreclens a unern and projecting with three projectors outo a concave $(.~reen, Cinerama was L·rgely deployed for seamless continu.ity between the three screens.32 With the exception of the occasional loss of registration (as in the th.ree-leggcd woman who appears in Saint Mark's Square in Venice, a freak byproduct of a mistake in camera alignment), most of the 6lm's eleven segment.< rely on the scope of the dongared rectaagular frame ro demonstrate the wrap-around immersion of the wide screen. The roller coaster ar Rockaway's Playland, a belicopr.er trip over Niagara FaUs, a bu.llligbc in Mad tid, and the canals of Ven.ice

THP. MU l.T I PLE

204

I

are lilmed in three-screen registration to demonstrate the panoramic expanse of the 146-degree Cinerama screen. One sequence of the lilm, however, divides the panoramic display into its three constituent segments, in a manner similar to Gance's Polyvision. Set iu Florid,.'s proto-theme park, the Cypress Gardeus segment <>xploits a three-way split of the screen. Speedboats pul.l "Aquabel.les" and "Aquabats" on water skis through the canals of Florida's Lake Eloise in au elaborate triptych choreography. The three-screen split shows the race not in a sequential cross-cut but in multiple simultaneous juxtaposition' ' Nevertheless, the predominant use of the three- projector Cinerama system was to hide the " seams" between each screen and give the illusion of an expansive, continuous panoramic display. As indicated in the promotional brochure accompanying This Is Cinerama!: "Not only has the screen a new shape and dimension, but now there are three projection booths simultaneously throwing the image ,on the scrccn- a clear, bright image that almost imperceptibly merges into one great, panoramic picture."" As anodler example of splitting d1e expanded horrtontal aspect ratio of the widened frame, several sequences of the anamorphic widescreen Cinema Scope film It~ Always Fair Weather (1 955, dir. Gene KeUy and Stanley Donen) split the screen into a triptych. The three-way split forms the perfect analog to the lilrn's narrative about the sepantion and reunion of three World War II war buddies (Gene Kelly, Dan Dalley, Michael Kidd). At the end of the war, Kelly tears a dollar bill into three pieces, one for each of the buddies. Each veteran goes his separate way. (Jolu> Belton also notes that tbe aspect ratio of the American dollar bill is "by strange coincidence~ almost exacdy the same shape as CinemaScope' z.Jp)." ln the mu.sical number "I Shouldn't Have Come," Donen uses a three·way split screen to show the three protagonists as they separately regret their reunion. Like many 1950s lilms that addressed the threat of television by incorporating it into its plor, the final brawl is at a TV studio but seen through the windows of the control booth and in the multiple-screen display of dle sru·
clio's television monitors. Whether or not, as Belton suggests, Donen's use of a

three-way split screen "playfully pa:rodies" the three camera/three projector system of Cinerama, It's Aluwyr Fair Weather used the single-projector CinemaStope format to fracture simultaneous action into comparative adjacent display. Another Cinema Scope (z.Js:t) lilm, Pillow Talk (dir. Michael Gordon,1959), used a two-way split screen to establish both the separation and the connection between its two protagonists-the single career woman played by Doris Day and the playboy songwriter played. by Rock Hudson. Day and Hudson share a party line; Day can't receive or make calls when Hudson is on the line romancing his many girlfriends. 'I11e screen is split to reveal their two separate habitats
CHA PTER

5

and the telephonic link between them. In the still shown in figun: 5·"· the frame edge is playfully eroticized. As Day and Hudson each ree!ine, nude in separare bathtubs, each places a bare foot on the wall."' The two sections of the split screen abut in the center of the frame, and Da)'s and Hudson's feet touch along the boundary that separates them. As in \IVeber and Smalley's StJJpmu, the telephone links these separate spaces, seen here in temporal, not sp::ttial, contiguity. The use of the split screen for its narrative possibilities continued into the 196os. In some cases, filmmakers were directly inspired by multiple-screen exhibitions seen at world's !airs. tor the '959 Moscow vVorld's !"air, the u.s. Department of State commissioned designer George Nelson and the Los Angeles-based rerun of Ray and Charles Eames to design a multimedia exhibit on American Lif e. The sheer number of images (2,200) displayed rhe abundance of life in the United States- automobiles, la\VJunowcrs, washing machines, rcJevisions, a plenitude magnified by the multiple (seven) screens." The exhibit's coy title, Gfimp$£$ ofthe usn, suggested that, in one swift but multiplied glimpse, the United States was a land of abundrutt cousumer durables, skyscrapers, housing projects, expansive highways, and the shiny ru1d happy people who use them. TI1e Eruneses drew upon a repertoire of images li·om their database of more than Jso,ooo slides, and rhe mulriple-screen presentation multiplied the impression ofscale. As Bearriz Colomina has suggested, the Eameses' multiplesc..reen technique was organized \\-ith the logic of data corn pression, condensing a large quantity of information into a compressed physical space." Seve.n twenty-by-thirry-foot screens were mounted inside an exp:msive geodesic dome designed by Buckminster Fuller.-"' After the success of Glimpses (it was seen by three million Soviet citizens and received wide critical acclaim), the Eameses received another government commission for a multiscrccn (six· screen) presentation at the 196· World's Fair in Seattle. And for the TBM Pavil'l'HE M\JLTlPLE

I 2os

s.tl Ril}' l1\od Ch~tle!l 1? 40loe$, Glimpu:sa.Jt!NfiSA (MOio.."()W, '9S9}.lm~ counc:>)'ofrhc: Urnes Archive, Lo. Ang<Je..

ion at the 1964 New York \<\lorf.d's Fair, Thi11k, the E:ameses' multimedia paean ro the virrues of the computer, increased the numi>er of screens ro foun:een."' \~'hile rhe Eameses :>>:e cert:>inly the best-known designers of mulriplescreen visual displays, other filmmakers were drawn to this fo rm of dispb y.

Another corporate pavilion at the 19<4 New York \~'orld's Fai r fe:u'O red a th.tee .. screen film (18 minutes, for the Johnson Wax pa<ilion). Filmed on l00>6oo in Mrica, Europe. and the United States by fi.l.nunakers Francis T hompson and Alexander Ham mid, To Be .Iflive won the 1965 Academy Award to r Best Documentary Shorr Subjecr.' 1 \<\'hen To Be A Hue recei1 ·ecl publicity from its Acad· emy award, a number of fearure filmmakers took inspir:·tioo from ir. In 1966, John Fran.kenheimer, who had seen rhe T hompson/I-lammid exhibit, usedl a three-way split screen tor his 70111111 Super-Cinerama film Grar~d Prix about
the French auto race." Frankenhcimer and cinematographer Lionel Lindon mounted specially constructed cameras on racing cars, combined dynamic poinr-of-view racing footage with helicopter footage from above. Ald10ugh Grand Pri.< was not projected omo multiple screens like rhe Tho111pson!Ham-·

m.id project rhar inspired ir, irs tripartite split of chc screen's wide· aspect ratio IV\IS a notably new narrative technique.
CHAV'fER

5

'"EXPANDED CINEMA"

In the full of 1965, a survey entitled E"f>rmt!ed Cirtemn was screened at the Film l\1aker's Cinematheque in New York Ciry. "There were artists working "~tb sound-light-multiple pJojections for a good ten years," wrote reviewer Jonas Mekas, "but they remained in experimen1:11l, semi-private stages until the E-xpanded Cinema Survey."" BeiWeen corJX> rAtely sponsored projects for world's fair pavilions and "expanded cinema" performances that included film projection alongside other forms of light-play-slide shows, searchlights with color gels, strobe lights, mirror-balls-multiple-screen projection became a marked vist1al display practice of the 196os." 1965-1966 In 1965 and 1996, Andy VVarhol, whose serial painted portraits and silk-screen multiples placed repeated images in serial display, beg:>n to also place moviog images in multiple array.'; In Outer nnd Inner Spau (1965, black and white, 33 mirLUtes), Warhol doubled the frame of the film screen by placing a video screen in the shot and then doubled the frame agruin by projecting two reds of film side-by-side."' As if in a mixed-media update of Edwin S. Porter's Undejoshat tl~e MO'IJing Pi<trm Show, \~1arhol framed his blonde supecscar Edie Sedgwick in front ofhc.r framed prerecorded vi.deo image. In a dever confrontation between the two competing media formats-video/television and film-Sedgwick's image was multiplied, quadrupled, in a mirrored mise m abyme. Jn the vide¢ inset, Sedgwick is ftamed in profile conversio.g with someone just of!Scrcen, oil~ f(allle. Bu t within the. film frame, tbe video monitor is placed in the back of the shot, and Sedgwick faces toward the filr.n carnera as if she is t.alki.og to someone just oifscreen, off-frame. On the few occasions when Sedgwick faces the inset screen, she faces herself as if in a mirror but with a time delay. (AltJ,ough the sound is at poin ts garbled, Sedgwick's portrait is also an auc·.ll one. At points she mocks herself, mouthing her words as she hears them and sees them on the video monitor.) As portraiture, r.h e nmltiplication of Sedgwick's iroogegives che effect of a quadrupled Edie, talking about fa111e aod celebrity in an empty feedback IO<>p. Warhol's title, Outer and ltmer Space, names the complex spatial and temporal pl:ty tl1at occurs between the outside and inside of the frame of t!te ·rv set and the frame of the film screen as it touches another screen in its multiple adjacent display. O ne might think cl>at Maw·;ce Merleau -Ponty, in his i94S leetun: on fiJrn aod the "new psychology,· had anticipated the philosophical gra,'ity of \.Yarhol's e.xperi.ment: "if philosophy is in harmony with the cinema, if thought and technical effort are heading in the same di.rectio11, it is because the philosopher and the rnoviernaker share a certain way of being, a certain ,;ew of
ANDY WARHOL AND THE MULTI PL E SCREEN,
TH'E MULTIVLE

I 201

the world which belongs to a generation. It offer. us yet another chance to confinn that modes of thought correspond to techrucal methods and that, to use Goethe's phrase, 'What is inside is :tlso out>ide.'"4 7 In many of his films "~ th

208

I

stationary camera setups, \NarhoJ l<ept his pe1 formers in the claustrophobic frame of the shot, often addressing someone, pe.rhaps the camera opcrntor, j ust off-frame. In Blowjcb (1964), for example, d1e edge of rhe frarne and rl1e act.i.on just olf·frame or off-camera become as erotically charged as the frame-line between Doris Day and Rock Hudson in Pillow Talk ln another double-screen pr~ject with Edie Sedgwick, Lupe (1965, color, 36 minutes), Warhol has Sedgwick reenact rhc 1944 suicide ovc.rdose of HoUr wood "Mexican Spidire" actress Lupe Velez. J\ s in Outer tmd Irmer Spilu, Lupe uses the doubling of two S<:'.reens in adjacent display to suggest the fracru.red subformance in jectivity of Sedgwick/Velez. In a morbid forecast, Sedgwick's pe· Lupe mirrored her own death by ove··dose in 197l.·s Warhol's most ambitious two-screen project, The Chelsea Gir!J (1 966, 210 minutes), projected twelve s ingle-take (ilm reds in double-screen display. Jonas Mekas describes the four-hour "epic movic· novd" filmed in the C hc.lsca H otel as "a series of rooms at the Chelsea Hotel, two rooms projected side by side at the same time. with difkrent people in different rooms~ or sometimes, overlapping,"·· And although Mekas doesn't linger on this model ofdoubJe-scJ-een pn)jcction as a doUhouse in a.'<onometric cross-section, he claims:"& the time goes, this gallery of people and ~ves grows into a complex human hive. The film in its complex and o,·erlapping structw-e, in its simultaneity of~ves before our eyes, comes closest to Joyce. Forgive me this sacrilegious comparison-really this is the first time th.·t I d..u:e mention Joyce in coru1ecrion with cinema. This is the

s.u Oul~.'r ond btmr SpP«, dirc-::red by Andy Wamol, 1965. lm;l.gt source and \'/::r.rhhl I\'fUlletltll , Pirtsbutgh, Penl')$'J-f,....ni~.

p<:rmi~si.:>n

from Andy

CHAPTER

5

first tUne I see in cinema a.n interesting solution of narraci\r e techniques that
enable ci nema to present life in the comple:<ity nnd riclmess achieved by mod· ern literature.~"' Warhors double-screen projects may have been edgy because of their unexpurgated content (althoug h per haps not as ove.rtly hardcore as that of Blow job, Couch, H<>rlot, or Vi11yl), and yet as fonn;U experiments \\~th the conventions of proje..'tion, they also d ireccly challenged the culrur<tl srric· t:w'es of the single screen. Doubl.e -sc.reen projection widened rhe visual field an<l, like the an h.istocical double-slide projecrio n, increased rhe o pportunity for fonnal and analytic comparison. Placing two r6mm projectors side-by-side, o ne ima.ge would comment on the other, space w::.J.s mo re comp.l exly fractured, and the temporali ty of past and present could intemct in simultaneity." As 'Warhol quipped: "1 puttwo things o n the screen in Chelsea Girls so you could look at o ne picture if you were bored with the other."" Multiple-screen projection also became a stand ard featore of the mul timedia "light shows" of the E:.'1'lcdi11g Plastit lnll'vitabl· and music"! pe·fonnances by ~n1e Velvet Underground and \·Varhol's "superstar" Nico in 1 966 and 1 967. £ 1'1 pco formanccs included three to five m<wie projectors, s~de projectors, strobe lights, and moving spotlights "~rh color gels, creating ;m expMded sensorium of fighe, sound, and moveJ11ent.-n In their z967 book The J\!Iedium lr the J Vfassage. MarshallMcLuhan and Cl.!Jcntin Fiore include au illustration of an El'T perfo,~ mance: a d ose-up ofNico's face looms as backdrop in mu.lti ple-s<'.reen proje<'" tion. McLuhan's text precedes the IWO-paf,'< spread : "[t)he audience beco mes n participant in the totnl electric drama'' (McLuhan used the wo rd · e.Jectric," not "clccrronic"): "1l lc ear fm·ors no particular 'point of view.' We are enveloped by sound.lt forms a seamless web around us . ... vVe hear souods from everywhere

I ·o·

7'lx C!Nirdtl Gir/f, di.recrod by Andy V.'arhol. 1 966. Jroage ooorcc: and p::nnj:s.stoo frotn Aottly Wamol Museum. Pif'bhurgh, PenJUytv.ani;t.

S..t~

TKt : M UJ.TII>L £

wi.thOut eve.r having to fOcus. Sounds come from ;above,' fi-om <below/ fron1 in

'

'front' of us, from 'behind' us, from our 'right' and from our 'left!*
1\llcLuhan emphasizes the auditory aspects of this immers.ive parti.dpation,

but he also incisively targets the shift from a fi,ed perspectival vantage to a multiple viewpoint, which could e.qually describe. the use of multiple-screen projection: "The main obstacle to a clear understanding of the effects of the new media is our deeply embedded llabit of regarding all pllenomena from a fixed poiut oi view.... The med1od of our time is to use uot a single but multiple models for exploration."" Mcluhan's instincts about rhis sruft in media were rooted in his thinking abollt the
instantaneous and continuous aspects of"ele.ctric cu·cuitry!' In the text of The Medium Is the

Mnsrnge, :McLuhan assesses a break with the deeply embedded perspective paradigm: "Since the Renaiss<tnCC the \>Vcstern artist perceived
his e.nvironment primarily in tc.rms of the

visual. Everything was dominated by the eye of the beholder. His conception of space was in terms of a perspective projection upon a plane Sllrfitce consisting of foro1al unir~ of spatial measurement. He accepted the dominance of
the ve.rcical and horizontal- or symmetry- as an absolute condition of order. This view is

deep!)' embedded in the consciousness of Western art.""6 Jn opp<>sition to visoal space,
S.lS

Dmwing from · Mar.;h:·ll McLuh(ln aod Qu<nti.o Fiore, Tlu. M«<ium/1 tbt. Ma$S(Igr. (NewYw~ Ruldom l-I(KISt, ·967).

JVlcLuhan pl·tced "prirnitive"' acoustic, hori-

zonless, boundless, olf.~ctory space. Although his analysis of the nonvisual aspects of the

prim.itivc seems counterinru.icive, his claims about the postperspc.ctival muJtidimensiona) models of"new rnedia"seem prescient: "Elec:.tric c.ircuitry js retreat·

ing in us the multidimensional space orientation of the 'primitive.'"" T lte p<trticipant-spect<lltors at "expanded," "e.~ploded" ouulr.imedia performances were enveloped by sow1d but also bombarded by light. In a 1966 pic<:c w More on Strobe Light and l ntcrmedia;· Jonas Mekas questioned Stc.ven Durkee, one of t'be producers of the usco "light shows," about the effect of the stro!be light. Durkee commented: "Strobe is the t!igitnl n·ip. In other words, wbat the strobe is basically doing, it's turn.ing on and off, completely on and coropletely off.. . . It creates · disconti;nu:~.nce so that it looks Uke the B.icks." T he iovocaCt!A P'r2ll

5

tion of the ·digital trip" inspired Mekas to muse funher on the subjective consequences of this U ghting ellect: "You become a p:mide, a gr:1 in of the movie. Maybe that's what it is. We are cut by strobe light inro single frames, to eight frames per second or whatever d1e strobe frequency is, on and ofF. .. . \'Ira know, tue started with a simple scrten and ()nc-long-td.kt image1; the·n we started superimpoting images; triple supnimpositiom; tbentu\fJ, thrte, 11ight sfteens; single frames; superimpositions were iurrher ntomrled, spi ritualized by silk screens and colored veils and sound tracks. Now we've left the screen, d1e tilm and we come down to ourselves, with strobes we cut ourselves i.nro single frames, like sorne symbolic or m:1.gic gesrur e or rinJ ::tJ."1S
POLYMORPHOUS, POLYSCE NIC POLYVISION: EXPO '67

In the spirit of world expositions as phantasmagorias, the pavilions of .i\>Iontrcal's Expo '67 displayed a wide variety of molriple-sereen exhibits, wirh names that emphasize the expanded li.eld of vision: CircleVision, Polyvision, Diopolyecr:~n. Following on the success of the 1\cad'emy Award-winning three-screen 10 Be Alitoe for the 1964 New York World's Fnir, Thompson and Hammid pro· duced the six-screen /!rt }'otmg for Expo '67." For the "Canada '67" exhibit at Expo '67, the Canadian telephone companies commissioned a nine-projector, 36o-degree Circle Vision tilm. RecaJ.Iing Raoul G rimoin Sanson's tc.n·p roje.ctor Cintoramn at the Paris 1900 Ex1wsition, C ircleVision used 1 1ine projectors concealed in the space between screens ro project a circuh.r: image, while twelve synchronized sound channels enveloped the audience in sound. The mosr ambitious multiple-screen projects at Expo '0 were found at the Czechoslovakian pavilion."' Czech set-designa and inventor j osef Svoboda's "Polyvmo11: Czechoslovakia- The Automated Country" used twenty slide projectors, ten morion-pic[ure screens, !lnd five mobile projection screens for an eighr-minute panorama of Czech indust:ri'd life. Another Czech invention, Emil Rado k's Diopolrecran, a mobile multiple-screen slide show, had viewers sit on a carpeted ftoor f.1c'ing a \\r:· i ll of uz separate cubes. From inside each culx.., two Kodak Carousel sljde projectors projected slides onto the fi'Onf of the cubes. Each cube could move into d~ree separate posirions within a two-font range, gi"ing the eftect of t he Aat surface turning into a th.ree·dimensional surface and backaga.i.n.ln all, there were fifteen S.l 6 Emil R:ulok, D~ytua.u, Expo " 67, : Momreal thousand images in the elel'en-minu te show.

w,

I Zll

Tli£ M U i..Til' I.. E

In addition to the two multiple-screen exhibits at the Czech pavilion, ao interactive narrative film , Kino-Automat (developed by cinematographer Rad(lz Cincera), had viewers vote o n the o-utcome of a film narrati,·e. Instead of random ju.xmpositioo of multiple- screen display, the narrative linearity of Kino-Automat was split into branching alternatives, dependent o n the majo rity vote. In the weeks before he began shooting The Thomas Crown A.ffoir (r968), Norman Jewison took bis cinematographer Haskell Wexler and editor Hal Ashby to Expo '67 to see ano ther multiple-screen project, C hristopl>er Chapman's A Place to Stand. jcwison credits Chapman,s "multi-screen technique: '' as an inspiring model for bis comple.x use of multiple inset screens in The Thoma.< Crown A.ffoir; "\>Ve were trj·ing to teU Jive stories," Jewison recounts, claiming "we used the multiple screen as a. story- telling device . .. long before digir.U effects and computerized technoi<>gy."6 ' Another film from 1968, The Boston Strangler (dir. Richard Fleischer), used multiple inset screens (in different si-·es and combinations) as a storytelling device. Flei.<cher split the screen into multiple views showing the prec -autions that Boston residents take-locking their doo rs, b\>)'ing guns, walking in twos or threes at night -and to display, for example, the shot a.od revecse-shot of a victim at her intercom and a point-of~ view shot of the intercom while sh e hears the str-·ngler's voice. As I've already discussed, Brian De Palma's Sisters (1973) used the two-w-·y
sp~t-screen technique to show bo th shot and counteC$hot in adjacent d isplay. A

212

I

voyeuristic neighbor (Jennifer Salt) sees a murder in an apartment across the way (a la H itchcock's Rear Winbt"} and calls the police. On one screen, we see Salt trying to convince the polioe to investigate, while we watch the murder being covered up on the other. In side-by-side parallel editing, by the time the

police arrive, there is no evidence. Iu addition to rllese examples from mainstream filmmaking, experimental
filnunakers continued m toy with the pot-entials of multiple- screen projection.-' Harry Sm.ith's unJi.nished Mahagomty (197o-t98o) was au ambitiot> S fourprojector, four-screen project. Resr.o red in 20 02, 1\lla.l:>agonny carries with it the fo rce of s<>me of the great projets mauditJ of the last cen!ltr)- Walter B~n jamin's Passagcnwerk, Sergei Eisenstein's film of Dns Kapita!-cqual in its gmnd iose aspirations, but destined to remain incomplete.·· As Smith declared, Mahagormywas "a mathematical analysis of Duchamp's La Mllriee mise arm par ses a!libotaires expressed in texms of Kl.lrt Weill's score for .llufsteig 1md FiJI! der Stadt Mahag01my witl1 contrapuntal i mages (not necessarily in o rder) derived from Brecht's libretto f(>r the latter work.·.., L ike Warbol's Chelsea G-irls, Mahagonny was shot in and arow1d tire C helsea Hotel in New York City. But unlike Warhol's double-screen projects that

played with random juxtaposition, Smith's color fou.r-screen project had a complex plan for its form<ll strucrure. Mapping his phms in cham, diagrams, and ind~.x ctrds, Smith deftly curated his filmed images, placing them in groups of tour, each image r:lised to its formal exponent in relation ro the others and co < he 65 soundtrack of the Brecht/\.Yeill opera. In rhe tour-screen structure, Mahagomry adheres to the organizing principle of the four sides of a rectangular screen. The projection splits the rectangular fr:H11e into quadrants, "~th each screen becoming a pictm·e block. a lllOnt:ag c clcmcnr poised for its comhlnatory power. Like the Eamescs' deck of colorful still images Horm> of Cards (195·), Smith's images fon11 ~ building set, >\rl encyclope<ful of objecrs, landscapes, :UJd pottraits to be dealt in recombinant juxtapositions. Color forms a matrix, " qu ilr, breeding kinship and symmetries between deep reds, glaring yellows, and mutt<'! pastels. Smith had a nwnerologicaJ system for the four-screen organj· zation- rwenry-four shots in each reel, twelve reels, tou.r images at a time. Images were placed in a fourimage grid - top left. top right, bottom lefi , bottom tight-sometimes paired vertically, sometimes paired hori:rontally, sometimes mirroring e3ch other in bilateral symmetry ·rhe disposirion and place of each screen image ampliJies its singular force; placed together, rhe four moving images exceed the bmden of their singular frames. Smith also sparialized his montage; the cur between shots is visible across the seam of the frame li ne. Mnl!agrmny's structural ambitions foretold its own difficult destiny. T he film was rarely projected as Smith intended.
s..1 7

M ULTI SCREEN BUT ALSO MULTIMEDIA: VI D EO A S M EDI UM

F'J\\.Jlle ~ol»gemen~ (rom Maba$f'ntty, dift(ted by H.ury Smith. 1 9]0-t9So. Image courtesy ofHmySmith.

T he formal confrontarion benveen filmic and televisual media took a variety of forms in the l9jOS and 1960s. The expanded scope of the fum screen was an attempt to win back Yiewers from the competing format of television; the split.. screen fractures of rhe wid=.reen were filmmakers' sl't'·tegies to more fully urilhe rhe new real estate of rhe wid=reen frame. In t he same manner that films of the 1950s (It~ 11/ways Fair Wratlm; Wil/SuueJJ Sj"Jil &ck Hrmtrr?) took television as an object of mt.rrativc., films of the 196o s and [970s began to use video as M inset medium. Warhol's Jm,.,.nnd Outer Space (1965) not only doubled the
THE MULTIP L E

scr:een into a two-screen projection bm, in each screen, Sedgwick confronted her prerecorded video image oo a video monitor placed next co her.'" But more

expansively, as video was introduced as an emerging art mediom, a wide array of video artists- Nam June Paik, Bruce Nauman, Vito Acconci, L inda Benglis,
John Baldcssari, Bill Viola, Gary Hill, and others-used multiple monitors to experiment with the fracturing o f time and the multiplication of the video image." Frank Gillette and Ira Schneider's Wipe Cycle (1969), ior e.xample, displayed a wall of nine monitors with a mix of live broadcast, videotape, and closed-circttit shots of people in the gallery. Br\lce Nauman's Live-Tap<d Video Corridor (1969-1970) placed two video monitors at the end of a narrow corridor, one on top of the other. One monitor displayed a live image from a video camera at d1e entry to the corridor, while the other showed a prerecorded video from the same position. Like Sedgwick -confronting her video self in f12TJe?' and Outer Space, the two monitors enact the confrontation of video-liveness with the rime shift of video playback. Nam J une Paik's playful repu··posing of d\e '~deo cabinet led him to new configurations fOr the cathodc~ray monitor. Whether it be his interactive deconstruction of the video image with electromagnets in i'Vfagnet ~·v (1965) or the baring of the apparatus in Zwith (Tv Looki11g Glass} (1974), Paik eviscerated the materiality of the electronic image, questioning television as a disposiJif"

21·

I

For 'Zenith (n' ~Anki"g(;/,m), Pai.k removed the cathode- ray ttl be from a Zenith television cabinet and replaced it w ith a Sony video camera. The set was placed in front of a window, with the m mera and the empty glass monitor screen frarniug portions of the view outside. \· V heu a viewer looked into the monitor screen, she saw what the c:uuera recorded taci.og the '\viudow on the worldt its livencss self- refiexively bared. A fuUcr examination of video :trt is outside the scope of this sntdy, but as artists ;md activists bcg-.tn to nsc the cathode-ray "roor Uror box in single or multiple arn(y, video entered the art world as a sculptural, time-based extension of painting in n:wch the s:>mc ways that the kinetic aspects of film were. explored by artists like H<tns Ricbrer al\d L<ls-d6 Moboly-Nagy in the t9zos. G-allerybased "installation" assumed a different configuration of spectator and screen. Video monitors had, at first, the force of a signed urinal- a piece of everyday plumbing. now framed as art. More rc.ce.n t museum and gallery instaHat.ions have freed video art from the confines of its bo.x, with video images being projected via the beams of high · resolution data-projectors onto tl1e wall."' Video- once only an "inferior cincma"- is now its brightly luminous equal. The matecial speci.6city of video-its small screen, its scanned image, its liveness-has been lost as the medillm has e.xpauded to i.odude film, video, and
CI-IA PTER )

computer display in wlm is now referred co as "rime-based media." \Vicb '~deo proje.c[ion and ever-A:1uer LCD or plitsma screens, the video image-art fOrm. display techno logy, closed circuit, broadcast, cable, o r satellite programbecomes a virruRI window on the wall . ..4\s Rosalind K xauss recently suggest<.xl,
aftt-er sc,·cral decades of video
~Lrt:

"(video) pn)ciahnr.d the end of medium-

specificity. In the age of television .. . we inhabit a post-medium condition:""
NVMERO DEUX ( DIR. J EA N LU C GODARD, 1976)

In his 1976lilm Numtrodeux, ] e:> n Luc God:trd mode bold use of on inser video screen. Godard placed two video screens in the black expanse of :1 35mn>

CinemaSc.ope frarne. T he t\vo screens-one brge, one small-produce a range

of formal variables that en:tct cbe litual dialectic of doubling and division, tl:uness and deprh, film ;uld video. 'Io make N~tmko t!eux, Godard shot t6mn't footage of n 11ctional worki.ng-dass fumi.ly engaged .in everyday domestic activities, transferred these segments ro videot<lpe, and rephotogr.tphed the video
images as they ·were displayed on monitors, usi ng
351THll

fi lm.

]Jl

rhis

W:l)',

Godard could use both the techniques of film editing (in 35mm) and the video eR:ects of key :1nd m:me over by. Within the grand denominato r of the full sc··ccn, Godard used the fitll panoply of possible combinations- o· > ly one small screen, borh screens in clialectic display, both screens wi'th the same imitge, with sync sound, nonsync souJfld, siJcnce. At one pojnt in the film, as if ro suggest a zeropoint of the 6U n's style-. the two inse t screens contaln only rhe static graininess of ,,ideo "snow" against the empty black b:lckg.·oCJ nd of rhe Jilin's frame. Godard o pens 1Vum.tro deux wi th :-t t11ll-frnme
shot taken jn the video contro.l room of his studio in

GL-enoble. We see Godard standi ng next toa 6Jm ch,ti.n , a fil m projector tha< projects directly into 3 vid eo camera. l n the frami ng of tlus sho t, Godard's head is cropped and oll'screen, severed by the frame edge, but it

is cesutured inco t'he shot, appearittg on the video mon... itor next to him in" simuh:oneous pl:lyb~.:k. O ftscreen cincmarographic space (the hors-dJ<Imp that Deleuze
writes about) is transmuted intoon·screen \'lde.o sp<H .:c.
Goda,.d is visible on both the full screen and the ill$<:! screen, conrro lling the production of his own in13ge. ([n t~).ct9 we arc aw are ot Godard's presence in e\'e ry aspe<'t of NumirodeU>.'. At one point, us the sync sound

s .1 a Fra.me e:nlar:gew..:.ots from Jean t.u.:: Co..Urd, lrtf6,

f.'J"""'· dau:.. direct(d by

THE MULTI P LE

S.t9 Fra.mc e~mem11 from NtXLta hU,Uo{New Book), ~d by Zbigniew Hybctynu.:i, l~J6. 1l'n~
(('IW.ti::S)' ()fZbig Visi-on

Ltd.

is int<rruptcd by a music tr:tck, we even hear his voice, as sound mixer, saying "merde" at this slip.) In full-blown self-refle.xivity, Godard assens control of
every shot and its combination-images are not juxtaposed in a random dialec· tic as in 'vVarhol's Chelsea Girls." \~'hile Godard's usc of the multiple inserscreen both uses and exposes the machinery of video production, we see the video cameras ru.1d monitors, but we n:ever see the 35mm scope camera that has 6lrued tl1e film.'ll1e cinema camera remains invisible, the stiUmystified source of rhe cinematic image, but the video mo1 titor is exposed, visible as M insta nt feedb:u:k

216

I

loop making the i'eception and projection of an image simultaneous. In Ouw aud bnur Spnu and in Numlr<> deux, \1\farhol and Godard m<d~i  plied the frnme by using tl>e video monitor as an inset med.ium. Not only did thes· films enact a formal confrontation berween ftlrn.ic and televisual merua, they borh imply d>e spatial context of video as the inner (domestic) space a11d film as the outer (public) s1 >acc of reception. In another film rrom '976, Nowa hiQ:il:n (New Book), Polish fummake rinventor Zbigniew Rybczynski divided the screen into nu1e squares, each shot displaying actions in a cubist fracture of contiguous space. T he fi~" is like a puzzle: \Ye follow vario\lS characters {a man in an orange: coat, a postman in uni... fonn, a man with a violin, :1 boy on a scooter) as they move from one space to anothe.r (on a bus seen fTo111 it~ inside, off the bus seen from its outside). 'l11e separate frames are loosely stitched together: rl1e space of each shot is only roughly contiguous with the adjacem one. Following tl1e movoment of people
through the nine separate frames, we asswne that the action in en.ch frame is occurring in real ti me (at o ne point, a sudden jolt occurs in each frame-an

earthquake, pe.rhaps) and char the separate spaces are unite<! in simultaneous

CHAJ·TER

5

response.'; Like Nvmero det«,Nowa ksiq:i;kawas made before digital teclmology could aid in its filroiug, editing, and postproduction effccts.13 Peter Greenawa)\ another filmmaker to explore the synta.x of the inset frame i.n his films, used video elfects to produce multiple-screen images, letterboxed f.:ames, overlaid teA"tS, and writing supoerin1posed on images. In Prospero's B!JCks (1991) and 'Pilhw Book (1996), Greena"'"'Y was an early adopter of digital technology for postproduction special effects. A history remains to be written of the accretion of digital minutes invading fum and television production, leading to the "born digi~J!" films of the present.
THE D IGITAL MOV IN G IMAGE: MULTIPL E IMA.GING AND DISPLAY

Digital titJemn ojftrs fOrmal salutic!IS to

~tensi!· limitations

tf mcchtmir.,; / cinema.

Patt, pnsent tmdfotun .:lm he spoke iu the Slimefn~me til onte.

-Gene Youngblood, "Cinema and the Code'

As evidenced in the 1966 discussion between Steve Durkee and Jonas Mekas, the concept of the "digital" began to creep i.uro dis.:oursc about representation and experience in rhe o nid-196os, but it had :not yet figured as a technology for image production or postproduction. HcrcJ a ta:wnomic question remains an important one. At what pou>t did the specificity of "6lm" as a medium become irrepar.tbly altered by digital technology? ln a slow accretion siuce the fusr usc of computer-generated images (was it the inf rared point ofviewofYul Bryner's gunslinger in Wi:stworld in 1973?) to the growing number oi on-screen minutes given overto ce o(cuG n ioati ng perhaps in 1<ryStor)' (1995), the first ceo featurelength animation) to Sky Coptai" and the H""-td ofTomorro<<> (2004, the first film with :ill-CG! background and live actors)-film has become its digi~.tl other. Sky Capta.in and the World of Tomornnu was bo rn on b.ard drives, developed on microchip, with no sets, no locations, ouly the bltte screen. Li.ke a James 1 hrrell light box, the blue screen is the foundation for a new screen reality.
1·1M£ CODE {DilL :MlK:E F I CG l S, 2000 )

J

217

In Time Code, Mike Figgis's fo\tt-cameta digital video project, the screen is split into quadrants. For a deftly choreographed n.inety-three minutes, starting at 3 PM oo November 19, r999, on Sunset Boulevard near the Los Angeles bookstore Book Soup, four hand-beld digital video cameras followed four separ.tte ~Jines" of action. Each c-amera filmed in "real-time"in one ninety· three-minutelong, unedited take." ln the final film, tbe four earner.> views ate shown iJJ fo\Lt

T H£ M U L'l' l PL E

screen s, quadrants of a full-size movie screen. The action--although iu real time-is fictional, acted and loosely scripted. For the viewer, each quadrant d isplays simulcweous but not sequential action, a &ttened fntctw·ing of a moment into four "perspectives." As in SuspenS<J (1913), it~ Always Fair Weathet·(1955), The BoJto" Strangler (1968), Sirtcrs (1973), and Numtro deux (1976), the sequential spatiality and cross-cut te mporality of single-screen film-making has been replaced by simultaneous nonsequential display. As the film commcJlccs, et~ch quadrant of the screen starts up sequentially: first, in rJ1e top right, a close shot of a W01 ruu1 (Saf!Ton Burrows) in a therapy session; second, in the upper left, Lauren (JealU'Ie Trippelhorn) scampers our to a pru·ked BMW to let rhe air out of the tires; clili·d, i11 the lower right, a roass:<ge therapist arrives at the offices of a film pn>duction company.11Ie lower leli screen shows rhe fractured screens of video surve illance. At first, we are not certain of the spatial
relation between these
sc reens~

w hether rhey

ate comiguous or distant. Like the other splitscreen lihns I've discussed, Time Cede links ill>
spaces with telepho nic simulta neiry. l n one

scene, Kyle McLachlan is on the phone with AJex (Stellan SkMsgard) inside the offices while
Law·en sits in her stretch limo outside Listeni ng to an audio· bug she has placed in thcbag of hcr lover, Rose (Salma fbyek). McLachlan is soen through the back window .of the limo, framed in the deep space o f one shot, while o n anoth.e r screen, he is seen from the front. The four sep-

5..20 Frame enlargement from Timt C<xk. <lirccrrd by Mik F@s,
2000.

arate screens abut each other. Characters from
o ne screeJl may wander into d1e space of another, seen fi·om
t\· VO

perspettives.

Another indication that rJ1e fow screens are aU displaying simultancous lines of action occu.rs when an ·'earthquake" conjoins the separnte screens as we sudder:tly re;·ct to the jolt. Figgis has projected the l lm with a variecy of sound mixes, changing the level of pl'iority of sound and image." The Time<Adewebsite declared: "Technology has arrived. D'>gital video hus arrived. For r:he first time, a film shot in real time. \.Vho do you want to watch? A scory that could only be rold in four dimeJlsions."'' Despite the 3ssumprion that even in multiple display one watches only one screen at a dme, \\'e acL ually \V;\tch aU of rhe screens at the same time. Rather than demonstrate our split attention, the iilm demonstrJtes om· ;lbilicy ro follow aU four screens.

CHAPTE R

5

The multiple-screen idiom has taken hold in the world of video art as well: Sam Taylor· Wood's seven-screen piece Tbinl Party (1999) peels a<9'.l)' the dynamics of a cocktail party by filming the event with seven cameros in real time aud projecting witli seven r6mm projectors; Isaac Julien :tad Javier de Frlltos's The Lu"g Road to MliZfltia" (1999), a triple ovo projection, plays with a full panoply of formal variables of the triptych s plit of images; and French artist P ierre Huyghe's double-screen piece The Third Mn nory (·ooo) panillels excerpts from Sidney Lumet's Dog DtJyAftm wm wit h H uyghe's own film of the bank robber, John Woytowicz, th.irl)·yeal'S later, reenacting the crime with actol'S on a set?7 lmo.ia.o. artisrSh.itin Neshat uses t:\vo screens in a trllogy of films, Turbulent (1998), Rapture (1999), and Ferwr (zooo), to vividly convey the. rigid divisions

in gender between Iranian men on one.screen and Iranian women on aoother.111 Doug Aitken's Electric Earth (zooo) used three. rooms with multiple screens to
display bis protagonist's stroll through rhe electric landscape of a Los Anbreles night; Christian Marclay's four- screen Vidcu Quurlet (zooz) corubines component clips from hundreds of movie scenes d epicting musical performances;" and in Barbara J<.n,ger's Twd ve (2004), the artist installed four screens in the :M ary Boone Gallery to sun·ound the ga.llery viewer-each screen has · close shot of a dining scene as a tc:~:t band crawls along the bottom of the screen. For contemporary artists who experiment with the representational possibilities of f!at-screeo digital video, the rollltiple- i.mage, multiple- frame,. multiple-screen format has become an ae<:ess iblc new idiom'" Filmmaker Julie Talc.n wrjt,cs: ..T he.re1s an unnamed satisfaction in stretching this newfoLWd ability to navig-Jte through image.s. We're. acrually hungry to use this ability, to Jeed it with something more substantive rh ao frenzied V'Jeb animations and stock tickers. We crave stories. T he single-channel fi~n is d1e visual art form of the gaze; multi-channel is cl1e art furm of the glimpse.""'
TH E COMPUT ER SC REEN AND I TS " WINDOW'

I ,,.

lnjror!l ofbim tl.ltlS tl;e display S(Ytetl. The inrge scn:en behh1d him coultl a/Jenul"/.7
bd"'o,~.;eell, or shan;.

multiple viei1.1S ofDcug~ /)lmd.;, hi.;for.r., the tnj0rnwti(J11 on tbrr

di;ploJ' screen, lllU! imago7 .t ofhiJ colleagues am/ their diJpltly strcrms at .111/en!o Park Tbl smm could be di'Vidc.d infO a mrmhr:r of"'windMus>· e.-uh ofwhich rr. m!tl,~::sptuy

either tat or image. The changing informlllion displayed on tiN Mrge urtl!t.', actitNlled by hisfinptip ccmmandson llteji!Ve-key .tlroict a:nd bi.s motimu oftiN mouse,

begmt fr/ ,'?Jri rllole under Drmg's tt m tro!. Uvttl)'lf)ll-<: in the room had attended hundreds

ofslide prr.scntatUms befrmt tbiJ, hut from tbe momeut ~1sgfir.~l im~Mrtcd mow"'

TH E

MU LT I ~ L&

ment lo the vit>WS rtn the Si~rem. it b~u1me t!'1.li.denl this wm lille ng audUn,;Jual pnstmlatU m tln)VJne had attempti-d bifbre.

-Howmd Rhcingold, Twlsfor 1'/wught, an ac<Ount of Douglas Engelhart's demonstration at the F:illJoiot Computer Conference, Sm JlraociS'-'0 Convention Center, Dr..cember 9. 1 968

In the 1960s, as filmroake.rs explore<! split- and multiple-screen formats, as the
media of video and fiL n began to i!llteract as production formats, there were, at

first, only subtle changes to vernacular screen media. But as the ·personal computer" began to invade daity life, a new "interface" to the screen begao t.o produce new modt~ of cinematic, television, and video display. Tbe grapbicaluser iurerfitce (now synoptically known as out) has changed rue ""ay we usc and imagine computers. Computing mechanisms were £rst room-siud mainframes, then faceless beige boxes. As they acquired display
screens, the. computer supplied a new 61interfuc.e" with its user. 41lnterface""-a

220

I

geometric term for the.surface thrur forms rhe common boundary between two rurce-dimensional figures-was deployed to describe the human-computer relation oo.ce the user was Gt.el'l\Uy "facing" the computer. In this way, the user's relation to tl~e computer screen can be measured in terms that we}ve used tOr other screen formats-the representation of llatne. <s and depth, tbe use of the frame, the assumed ''point o{ view" of the viewer, etc. The metaphor of the win dow, so overdetermined by !he connotative drag of its cnlrural heritllge, qttickly entered inro the terminology for computer operating S)"tems, as an inevitable component of computer"architecture." BtLt here, as we enter into the discursive terrain of computers and computing, it wW become apparent that an entirely different set of terms and philosophical assumptions arc at play. Computer operat·ing systems also rely on metaphor, as if we can imagine the (umre only in rue familiar langt·age of the past. Metaphors, of course, are already translators. Metaphors substitute one
thin.g fo( another, pe.rfonning an alche.my from a mate.rial referent to the imma-

terial tissue of language. But computer metaphors are not just descriptive figures, aloft in language; they are int~gra! to tlte conversion of binary bits of information into words and images. A compu ter metaphor acquires nearmateriality as ~l v irtual object.

In the history of computing de,ices, the use of metaphor became a direct component of the gmphic display screen. In lnterfoce Cultu,.e (1997), Ste.ven
Johnson eloquently details the ways in which the graphical user interface t.mnsformed the spatial imagination. Johnson convincingly argues that visl!al metaphors (of the desktop, the window, but also of the personal assistant, shopping
C NAPT£ R

5

mall, rown square, and living room) have served as key culmral accommodations
to a "digiml revolution" :itnd to an iotertate wirh a new "space" of information.~

l11e earliest computing det~=-BL~ise PaS<.--:t l's calculator, the Pascalinc (t64z), and Charles Babbage's D ilfcrcncc E ngine ( ·Szo}-wcrc bross instnt·
mc nts crafted wi th the same precisi.on mechanics of clocks, \-\""atches, and automata. One can easil)' imagine the user's engagement with such intricate

pieces of design. These e-.uly compu ting appararuses were prosthetic devices, oliloading the calculations of the human br3in ro the delicate workings of a machine. As rhe m:lchinery of computing grew to room-sized mainframes, the human user was dw·ufed by the sheer scale of rhe m achine. Contact wirh these
ga:rganruan mach.ines became an awkward interaction via knobs and diaJs, plugs and circuits, punch-tapes and punch-cards. One way to conceptuafue the changing "interface" with computi ng machinery is ro consider the barriers between humans and machine. John Walker,

founder and

CEO

of the compmer design company Autodesk, charrs five sue·

cessive "u.~r . inreraction generations" in terms of the intermediaries placed between the human and thcco.-nputcr. front panel, cowttcrtoP> tc:rrWnal, menu, screen.s; I n Walker's account, the "first generation" was dumsy but duecr: "the

user went one-on-one with the computerf in rhe compurer room, operating the computer at the switch and knob levc.L Since the u.scr was rhc operator of the
machine and controlled it with li trle o r no abstractiOJ 1.· there was essentially no mediation between the computer and its expert user."" In the mpid set of technological changes rhar led to the advent of rhe personal computer in the<a<l)'l98os, the acquisition of:1 display screen as the visual

I

221

THE MU J..'f i Pl.E

222 1

from alphanumeric "conun. tnd li nes" to a screen witlt icons Md images were the rwo key developrnems thar brought che compure.- closer to che other predon1innnt forn1 s of 1 visual imaging." Add an Intc:rnet· crmbled V\lorld \~ ide \Neb to this graphicdispl·yscreen, and the computer window opened itself to convergences with the ci nema and television screen.96 In 195 1, the \·Vhidwind, an .Air For ce-funded militarycornpucer at t-·tJT us:e..i a circuJar CRT screen equipped with a J jght pen and a keyOOard tOr1nput into its mainframe. Modeled di rectly on a radar screen, the Vlfhirlwind'sc RT screen was more of a porrl1ole th<>n a rectangular frame." Although the screen se.rved as a rmation in .ro a large mairUntme, .it was, as is npparenc in surface for entering inf·O figure 5.22, one of sev<:.ml means oflnput at the front panel of the m{lSsive device. The ionage (JU;llity of radar monitors and early compu1·es CRT screens, f. 1r from the pixels of today's display, was not sh;trp enough or bright enough to displnr details of characters and foms."' \Vhen, :1s a rcserucher at the Stanford Research 1nstitute, D ouglas Engelb~Lrt first hooked video termi nal:; to <..'On"l puter m~infr~mes, his specially designed monitors had smill, fuzzy blnd:-~nd white screens.
1

interf<lct: vvith a computing mechanism and the.

s"~ tc.h

CHAPTER 5

'The exact origin of the. first use of the renn ''window· as a mewphor f<>r >10 inset fi:-.tmed section of the computer screen is difficult to pinpoint. Douglas Engelhart may not have used the exact rerm "window" ro describe his multiplescreen "-rv approach'~ to the comp\lter iuter('l.ce, yet his 'Augmentcd Human l nreUect Study" contained a prototype for the form. In a r962 project description, "Augmenting the H uman Intellect? A Conceptual Framework," Engelhart declared his EnlightetUnent goals for the computer: "By 'augmenting human intellect' we mean increasing the capability of a man to approach a comple.x problem situation, to gain comprehension to suit his p<>rtic1llar needs, and to derive solutions to problems:·.. As Engelb:u·t summarized some of the coo.dusions to be drawn from his study: "VIle see t he quickest ~s emerging from (t) gi1·iug rhe human the minute-by- minute services of a digital computer eq~>ipped with computer-driven Cllthode-ray-tube display, and (2) developing tb.e new meth.ods of thinking and working that allow the human to capitalize upon the computer's help!'"' To illustrate computer-aided "intellect augmentation; Engelhart supplies an example that uncannily draws us back to Alberr.i :Uld his 1452 architectural treatise De re nedifoatorin (On the Arc ofBuilding). Engelhart imagines ao architect designing a building at a computer workst-ation. The system imagined has "a visual display screen some three fC:!.et on a side" which is his "working surface." The.display screen is controlled by a computer ("his 'clerk") chat the arcbitCC! runs "by mc-.tus of a small keyboard and various other devices." Engelhart describes the architect's WOJ'k pcocess, which begins wim a "perspective view": "he bas just coaxed the clerk to show him a perspective view of the steep hillside building site with the roadway above, symbolic representaliions of the.various trees dtat are to remain on the lot, and the service tie points for tlte different utilities. view occupies the left rwo-d> irds of d1e screen. With a 'poinrer,' he indicates c:wo points of interest, moves his left hand mpidlyover the keyboard, aud the distance and elevation between the points indicared ap·pear on the rigbt-haod third of the sc.ree1 \."91 The."pe.rspecthr eview" occupies only a portion of the scre.en; the.other portion dL·pla)'S specifications of distance. and ekvarion. As the.architect's work · proceeds, he enters specifications for the building using a keyboard and pointer: "Now he enters a reference line with his pointer, and the keyboard. Gradually the screen begiJJs to show the work he is doing (a neatexcav:ttion appears in the hillside) revises itself slightly, and revises itself again. After a moment, the architect changes the scene on the screen to an overhead plan \~e.w of tbe site, stiU showing the e."\:cavation.'19l The perspective viev..- undi.fl:ereuciated from its Renaissance forebear-shifts witb the stroke of a lirtgt.r to an overhead view. The huagi·\ed depth of the screen surf.\ce, deep toward a v:>o.ishing point at one moment, shifts
1

223

·n,e

to d1e fiat surface of the view from abo\·e. Prior to Renaissance perspective, painterly representation did not in1ply a sing\Llar fixed point; the view was from both above and below. \>Vhile the exact details of the screen and its component portions are not described in Engelhart's 1962 proposal, IUs intentions for what he would call a "Tv approach'' to a multiple- screen display are prototypically clear. E ngelhart worked on tb.is interface through the mid-196os, b\lt his ninetyminute multimedia demonstration of uerworked computing at the Fall Joint Computer Conference in San Fr;uJcisco on December 9, 1968, was to the computer window what the Lumiere brothers' December 28, 1895, showing at the Grand Cafe was to the cinema: ;t pro,·ides a dramatic markable date, more symptomatic than exact, and only to be qualified by corrections and cxceptions. 9' F ilm historians debate the "first" public projection of moving images: was it the Lumiere brothers' scientific demonstration in March rll<)s, or their December r895 showing at the Grand Cafe; o·r the November 1895 public projection by the Skladanosky brothers at the Winter Gorden in Berlin? Equally, the computer graph.ic display window was demo11strated in a \'llricty of venues, all of which are described with a dramatic weight equivalent to the writing of protocinematic history-Engel bart's r968 display at rhe Fall Joint Computer Conference, Charles P. Thacker's April ·973 demo of the Alto at Xerox P.,_ R c, Steve Jobs's 1979 visit to Xerox PARe, the r984 Super Bowl ad that introduced th e Apple Macintosh. In the report that aecomparued the r96S demo, E ngelbart describes the components of his displa)' system . He emphasizes the limitations of the system (he used small black-and-white Cl<Ts), but also defends the cost features of this
"TV approach":

224

I

srJ"

Tbe display systems consists of two identical subsystems, each with display controUer, display generator, 6 CRT's, and 6 dosed-circuit

te.levision systems.
sCJb The display controllers process display-command tables and display lists that are resident in core, and pass along display-buffer contents to the display generators.

SCJ" The display generators and CR'r's were developed by Tasker
Industries to our specifications. Each has general character vector plotting capability. They will accept djsplay buil'ers consisting of instructions (beam motion, char-~cter writing, ere.) from the conrroller.

Each will drive si.x s-incb high - resolution c ~'l''s on which the display pictures are produced.
CHA PTER

5

S<:JCI Character writing time is approximately 8 microsccortds, allowing an average of tooo character. on each of rhe six monitors wheu regenerating ar 20 cps. s<Jd A high-resolution (875-u ne) closed circuit television system transmits di splay pictures from each Cl<'r r.o a television monitor at the

correspondingwork-st.ation console.~
E ngelbart does not use the term "window" in this description of the r968 demo- only the retrospective ac 'COunts do. lnt Howard Rheiugold's description of £ngelbart's 1968 show, for example, Rheingold uses the word: "The screen could be divided into a number of'windows,' each ofwhich could display either g information displayed oo the !.rge screen, acti text or image. The changio. V'ated by his fingertip commands on rhe five- key device ancl his motions of the mouse, began to animate under Doug's control."" lt is not clear whether the term ~window" was actuaUy used at S J U or whether now, in rc.cove.rcd mc.mory, the inset screen was belic'Ved to always already have been a window. But after Engelhart's demo, there is a cl<'llr instance in which the window metaphor was invoked. In bis 1969 dissert ation at the Uruversity of Utah, Alan Kay described a graphical "object orientation system" that had "VI f. W and '\,~Noows""' The flgure of a "viewport" is only slightly dif'l'erent from a window and could equally have become tbe proprietary trademark. Both imply an aperture, a visual porthole onto the graphic e.xpanse of a screen that simulraneously represents and masks dte workiltgs of the computer's code. In this form of "object- oriented" programmirtg, anythi ng could be an object- .>
·'ORTS"

I 225

number , a word, a picture-and hence it was assumed to be a multimedia dis-

play. Kay imagi ned the computer as just such ·a meta medium able to incorporate other media, a convergence de.vice \\"'.Uting to happen. As computer operating systems were developed dtro\·gh d1e 1970s and into the 198os and as the "'personal"computer was tna.J'ke.ted as a COilSlLfl'l et ·tppliance.! the use of a screen was not an immediately apparent advance. While other corltemporancous developments (the military roots of ARPANET and the cvcnrual Internet) were expanding the potentials of networked communjcation, the emerging conventions for computer djsplay took place in the laboratories of corporate research aud development.91

In April1973· the Alto compllter was demonstrated to a group of researchers
at Xerox
PA RC.

The Alto's eighr-and-a-half-by-d cven-i nch ca-r screen dis-

played an "animated test pattern" of the Sesame Street character Cookie Monster in digital ones and zeros. The computer screen was "bit-mapped," given a fitcc
T IH ~

M Ul,.TIPI. E

226

I

but not yet a window. The Alto was an in-house computer at PARe, not released to the market. But the competition with old media was clear; to viewers accustomed to 7omm widescreen films a.nd colorful h.igh-resot.. tion television images, the computer display was sti.lla di m relative. The Alto screen was shaped like an upright letter-siud piece of paper, so the implicit metaphor of this interface was that of typing onto a page. Other members of the PARC group were dlevcloping crucial components of what would become a display screen with inset "windows.""' l n 1975, Dan Ingalls wrote a display algorithim that provided tbc means to move whole rectangles of bitmap from one location to another. "BieBlt" (au abbreviation for bit boundary block transfer) became the root algoritbim for overlapping "windows": part of the screen could be hidden by a block that appeared on top of it, as if the screen dis· play had layers. Not only could the screen be divided into seplU'Ote movable inset frames, but each one could run a different application-one displaying a r.ext program, one filled "~th pure code, one with a drawing. The. overlapping window changed the metaphor ever so slightly. The surface windowpane now had depth and defied gravit)l since windows could also be stacked. The user would manipulate from a p<>sition as if in front and also above. The window interface did, however, rely on the idea of a dynamic square- a resizable, dr<~gable, motile frnme, with a scroll bar to navigate within its boundaries. The computer window is like a screen where the con rent'S move but the &am e.stays stable. The graphical user interface developed at Xerox PARC emphasi·ted tlte metaphoric nature oi computer usage-"mice" that scurry under our fingers at the fltud command <>f wrist a.nd palm; "desktops" that defy gravity and transform the horizontal desk in to a vertical surface with an aJTay of possible documents and applications; "icons" tltat represent objects or, more exactly, object-oriented tasks. This interface became known as the W!M P interfaceWindows, Icons, Mouse, PuU-down Menus."' The bitmap screen introduced a new layer to the user in terf':lce. In the graphk interf.u:e, the user dire,ctly manipulates a virtual version of what she intends to command-the usc.r selects, drags, drops, opens, closes, copies, deletes, puts in the trash. Tbe user can see the documents and applications on the "desktop" and in the "windows" of the screen. By contrast, the user of the "command Une" inte.rface may be "conversing" with the computer, giving it commands tO perform a task, but she must speak to it in its code. Instead of translating a three-dimensional material world to a two-dimensional virtual representation as painters and photographers and filmmakers have done, tl1e bitmap cornput· er display constructs its virtu:U world cr.tltcly ft< un digital in for-

mation. The bitmap screen performs a different translation: from the nondirnensional immateriality of bits to a visual (graphically iconic) mapping of metaphor onto the virl\1 aliry of a two-dimensional screen. The computer "window" referred to any e nclosed, rectangular a.re11 on a display screen. In a l98· book l'ri11cipln oj"Computer Graphics, the "window manager and the t.erm "window" were nonproprietary idioms: ''1\1-.my system and user progr:.uus on the A vro employ a window manager to control multiple, typically overlapping windows, i.e., areas on the screen in wbich a page or piece of a page maybe displayed. Each window is in essence a .-.triable-size virtual. screen that reflects the progress of some activity. The general eftect is one oflooki ng at a small desk with papers of varying size lying partially on t.op of one another."""' T he "window" here refers to a "variable size Yirtual screen" but is also a component of a mixed metaphor: a window and a desk. The desktop metaphor of a stack of papers, in o'·erlapping array, implies a view &om above. T he. window metaphor impUes looking into or out of an apc.rture, a .:~perspective" position. F..ci ng an upright perpendicular surface. Stackingwiudows on top of each other, piling documents in layers, meant that the user CO\tld maximize tbe limited "real estate" of the relatively small screen. The space mapped onto the computer screen was both deep :tnd flat. It implied a new haptics in the position of irs user: in front of and aboYe. T he window-based interf·ce allowed !the user to Of>eo more thau one window, introducing the concept of multiple tasks, appucations, views to the computer user. .,A computer is jusrone machine," writes Yale computer scientist David Gelermer, "a screen is a single plot of real estate, but windows allow you to create as many coronmnication channels as you cho<>sc bcn"'een yourself and your running program."101 In December ·979· Steve Jobs-the twenty-four-year-old cofounder of Apple, tbe. manuf·cn 11er of Apple I and Apple II personal computers-visit£d Xerox PARC. Apple II Md Commodore home computers both were configured to use TV screens as monitol's. The 1981 1BM PC used a m.ooochr o m eCR'I' sc.reen bur not C UI display. Retelling the import ofJobs's tom of Xerox PARC wirh the full narrative intrigue of industrial espionage, Michael Hilt'i<ik describes Jobs's visit as a "daring raid.'""' (According to another writer,Jobs traded $1 million in stock options in Apple for the visit.)'"' At Xerox PARC Jobs saw the graphical user intertace nsed on the f\Joo and t.he Star. The GUI-run Xerox Star was introduced to the market two years latec, in t981, but its price was too higb for the home computer market. Jobs used both the Alto and the Star as models for the 0 1983 Apple Lisa,1 ' the first persomd compU!tCf with GUI. Althot1 gb the Lisa

1 221

T tlf~

M ULT IP J. E

didn't sell well {it was priced at S9,995 and aimed at the business marker), Apple's next product was introduced less rhau a year later, with a dr:Ullatic ad campaign that drew its strength from the h.istoriatl confluence of ant iSoviet cold war rhetoric and rhe On·dlian y<.ar, 1984. I n a now-historic.sixry-second spot, plac.ed during balf-tirne. of Sup.er Bowl XXL on January 2 2, 1984, Apple unveiled its new computer, the Maciutosh.'05 The ad, produced by 1.21 Screen shot of Apple Lisa, ·98J. Los Angeles-based ad fum Chiat!Day and directed by Blade Runner director Ridley Scott, opened onto a monochromatic future city connected by tubes full of conformist worker drone.< marching as if in robotic obedience to unseen commands. They march in lockstep into a large auditorium where a Big Brother preaches in monotones fro m a giant Tv screen . Suddenly a lone woman, in a white tanktop and red running shorts, bursts iruto the auditorillm and sprints down the center aisle carrying a large hammer. She runs at the screen and tosses the hammer toward it, shattering it with a blaring 228 explosion of light as the voice-over announc-es: "On January 24th, Apple Corn -

I

purer will introduce the Macintosh. And you11 see whp984 won't be like 1984." With this dramatic introduction, the Apple Macintosh triggered what Neal Stephenson deemed a "sort of holy war in rlte computer world.""" T he M aciOltosh, priced at a much more reasonable h,495, was a personal computer with an operati11g system based on graphic display instead of the "comm:md line"
interface.
PROPRIETARY W I NDOWS

I n his 1995 memoir, 1'he R(}ad Ahead, Bill Gates recalls the transition from the command l.ine to graphic ~nterface. Gates describes his intention, as early as 1983, to develop graphical interfAce and to abandon Ms-oos: "Our goal was to create software that would <!Xtend MS - oos and let people use a mouse, employ graphical images on the computer screen, and make available 011 the screen a number of 'windows; each nlwling a difterent cor n.p"t.ater progr:-am. "107 In G ates's account, the other lWO personal computer systems that had graphical interfaces in 1983, r.be Xcrox Star and Apple Lisa, were propr ietary and expensive: "Microsoft wanted to create an open standard and bring graphical capabilities to any computer that was running Ms-oos:·ull< Despite rhe rhetoric of

CI-IA PTtR

5

an "open st'.andard," Microsoft attached a proprietary trademark to the term ",vindow'' and

in November 1 985 introduced graphical cornpu.tiog to IBM Pes (and their "clones"} with a product e111led V\'indows r.o. ln the fall of 1987, \<V" mdows z.o added icons and resi~able, overlapping windows.The software war had begun. I n 1988, Apple sued Microsoft for copying the "look and feel' of the Macintosh's graphic 5.2.4 S<tttn shot of VVJ.O<Iow:; (,O, )!)S_s: \\ ' indowg :u-e "'tiled'" ~nd <:M display, but the term "windows' now belonged !Oot beo\·~rl'apped. to Microsoft as Windows'~" tO'/ By 1993, Windows 3.0 , which was released in 1990 , had sold zs million copies. And as the media-santratcd cantpaign for \· Vindows 95 emphasi-zed, by the end of its first de-cade, Microsoti's W indows became the most widely used operating system."" As David Gelerntcr writes; "Pushing beauty instead of old-fashioned oos ugliness, Microsoft emerged as the uncontested! leader of the desktop com· pu.ting world."W Like the lVIac os, rhe "interfi1 ce" ofVVindows extends screen space by overlappjng screens of varjous sizes; each "window" can run a different application;

che user ca.n scroll through a tcxtwithio a "window," arrange "windows" on the screen in stacked or overlapping formations, decorate "windows" (with wallpapers, textured patterns), and conduct new forms of '\··in dow shopping.·m The '\vindows· trope is emblematic of the collapse of rhe single viewpoint; it relies
on themodel of a window that we don1t see through, windows that instead over-

I 229

lap and obscure, and are resizable and movable. Consider the following shift in discourse from the Albertian metaphor. Webopedia, an online dictionat)' of new media term.s, defines "windowft as distinctly polyscenic: An enclosed,,rewmgular area on a display screen. Most modem operating systems aud applications have gmpbieal ·user iuterf.!ces that let you d;vide your display into several windows. Within each window, you cau run a different program or display different data. \~lindows are particularly valuable. in multita.sk.ing erwin:mmen/1, which allow you to ~xecute several programs at Qnce. By di\r iding your
display into windows, you can sec the output from all the programs at

the same time. 'Io enter input into a program, you simply click on the desired window to make it the foreground process.'"

TH E MOLT I I'L £

INTERFACE CULTU RE

J.Vhy 11rt we rejuling txplicit "Wf.ir.tl·bm:r.d intcrrfi1a;J, tmd embrt~cing g;mpbicol or unsort'nl Otlts- a tre11d that.tlctt>untsjbr the tut.teJl. ofboth .Microsoft fl1Ul Di:mc)'f
- Neal Stc. pheL'\son, In tlx Btginning Was the Cmnmaml Liue

Before Microsoft adopted a graphical user interface for its Windows operating system, the "holy war· between t·he MAC and the Ms-oos ·command line" interface was described by Umberto Eco as a struggle between lVlacintosh/ Catholicism ("the essence of revelation is dealt with via simple formulae and sumptuous icoos") and Ms-oos!Protestantism ("To make the system work you need to interpret the program yourself: a long way from the baroque community
of revelers, the user is dosed "~thin the loneliness of his own inner torment"). uo~

The religious war between a command line and a graphic display interface pitted the word a11d the text against rbe image and icon. In his polemical treatise Jn the 8egimrir~g Was th< Commar~d Lin< (1999), cyber-noveUst Neal Stephenson rails agai nst a growing global "int.c1 face culU Stephenson comture:' a monoc.ulturc witl-l a computerized visual intc,rface. 1

230

I

pares the Macintosh and Windows interf.tce: the. Macintosh is "not only a superb piece of engineering but ao embodiment of certain ideals about the use of technology to benefit maukiud," while Microsoft's Windows equrV'3Ient is "a
pathetically clumsy imitatio n and a sinister world domination plot rolled i1l tO

14 And yet, despite the competition between the l'vlac and vVindows operone."1 ating systems, Stephenson holds both systems ac<x>untable for millions of computer users becoming accustomed to a graphic.-.! interface."' By mapping code onto a graphic displ:>y, the GU I interface conceals its workings, b.ides its code. In Stephenson's account, the gn~phieaJ interface "introduced a new semiotic Jayel· between hum an and machine: uGOls use metaphors

to make computing easier , but they are had metaphors~ 08 Stephenson com-

pares this to the D isney model of "putting out a product of seamless illusion." (Stephenson's diatribe c-arries with ir an implicit critique of icon-based graphics as reductive cartoons.) Iu this ·way, botb the Mac and Windows operating systems are in the same business: that of "short-circl·ir.Ulg laborious, explicit
verbal communication with expensively designed interfaces."lt' Alte.rnativeJy)

Stephenson champions the Li ntLx operating system because its workings arc. exposed and it can be customized by its user, like a tuner-car. An obvious ana)ogy occurs bere: both dle Mac os :and Wwdows inre.rface operate like. classical Hollywood film style-couce:tli.ng its workings, airning for unre8exive illusionism-while the Linux os operates more like an independent or avM t-garde

film, self-reflexive, its S11bsttatos and premises exposed. The Linux os is compu6o.g with distancia6on, as if it were an operating S)e;tem designed by Bertolt Brecht. But Stephenson's polemic holds a pres<:iem command of the global etr ects of interfuee culnu-e, for cuos have become the. "meta-interface" fo und

on a] most :my screen ic device-vcR s, cell phones, c.ar navigarjonal systems,
gaming consoles, and my favorite new screen-enabled applia11ce, the SamS11t1g
"Internet re.IYigeJ "'.ttor."UO

While the scale and dome~ tic place of the television roay have prepared us for the screens of the "personarJ computer, cmnputc.r "users" arc not spectators or viewers. Immobile, wlth atte.ntion f(>cuscd on a screen, the "user" interacts directly with the framed screen image using a device-keyboard, mouse, or in the case of touch-screens, finger- to manipulate what is contained within the parameter of che scceeu. Computer intertilces may have been designed to become dyadic partners in a metaphysical relationship, bt~t complaints about the. awk-wardness of this liaison have targeted the interf:tce. Brenda Laurel proclaims: "Using computers is like going to the movie theater and having to watch the projector instead of the. Jilm."m
OLD METAPHORS. N EW SCREENS

For Alberti, the metaphor of the window implied direct, veridiC1ll, and unruediated vi..slon> transparency of surface o r ape .rture, and transmitted light. T he

231

computer "window" implies its opposite: the visual field seen through a computer 'window" is rarely direct (although webcams p.lay on this fi.mction); it is mediated to a high degree through its proprietary or trademarked "software'; and its representatiooa.l function is h.igbly iconic. Computer "windows" coexist on the flat surface of a computA:r display. They open onto A atness or depth, image or te..xt, moving or still conre.nt. Som;e "windows'' open onto networked systems, some only refer to the hard drive of its base. Although computer "win-

i..'iows" can be "open"' at the same time, they rarely serve, as the art historical
double-slide ptoje.otion did, as a mea.ns for co>up;~rative analysis. So let's consider the compute. r usc.r who navigates the."windov.rs"' of screen space. In the mixed metaphor of the computer screen, the computer user is figt·ratively positioned with mul6ple spatial xelations to the screen. "Windows" smck i11.frf!n/ · ?/each other (if one is looking into the screen perpendicularly, as if through a window} or on "'fifeach other (ifone is looking iuto the screen as if its perpendicular is in a gravity-defYing nillet)'-degree rotation of an angle overhead). fu either a "page" or a "window," a mobile switch of position
is implied in the mixed metaphor: the user switches between a recumbent (desktop view} ;md an upright (window) view. The desktop metaphor implies
THE MUL'I'lPL £

and foregro\tnd layers, but seen from above. The gravicy-defying space of the computer screen accustoms us to the antigravity of cc t in films such as CmuchiTig Tiger, Hiddm Dragon, and The Mtttri.< . T he computer user may
switch back and forth between these layers, open and dose "windows/' switch activities at will. The user may not be able to see each ''windoW' in the St' .J.ck on

b~ckground

the desktop, but this doesn't mean the program isn't there or is no longer active. The computer may be "thinking" about several things at once, it may have sev· era! applications op;:u, different programs running in separate "windows." · Of course, the icons of the graphical user interface are reductively simple, far from high art, further even from the screens of popltlar culture. T he Microsoft version of the window interface did not even draw on the "deep beauty" that David Gekrnter finds in software that is "simple and powcrfuL."W And yet, on the fractured plane of the computer screen, the metaphor of the window has retained a key stake ;n the technological reframing of the visual field. The Windows interface is a postcinematic visual system, but the ''iewerturned-user remains in fi·onr of (vorstelkn) a perpendicular frame.
MULT I TASKIN G, THE COMPUT ER " W I NDOW," A ND T HE MULTIPLE SCREEN

232 J

Tbe distrntted persrm (der Zerstremc). !()(), ca11jbrm habits. ft1ore, the ability lo
master c:ert11i11 tasks ifl a stat./. ofdi~<:tractifm proves that their solution hm /J«qln(. tt
mllitercfhobit. . . . /{ca ption iJl n s/4/e (Jfdistro::/i()n . . . finds in /bejtlm its true
means ofe:uuiu.

-W:'lltc.r Benjamint "The VVotk of Arr U\ che Age of Mechanical Reproduction"

Iu au oft-cited passage from "The Work of An in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction," \'lalt.c.r Benjamin draws a distinction between the modes of "receptiOn1J of painting, film, and architecture . .:.:Painting invites the spectator
to contemplation/concentration," Benjamin explains, while "Architecture has

always represented tbe protot)'pe of a work of art the reception of which is con· summated by a colle.:tivit)' in a sta~e of distraction." The film meets this mode of reception "halfway."'23 Architocrural theorists have often bridled ar Benjamin's dismissive g:eneraliz:ttion about the experience of architecture and, equally, film theorists have debated this assessment of the film spectator. But
"reception in a state of distraction'' now seems to provide a prescient mode) for

the multitasking computer user. For cinema spectators, the conventions of film narrative and the protocols of tlleatrical e.xhibition encouraged cognitive foct·s and engagement. {SpectaCHA J >T ER

5

tors who eat loudly, make out, talk on their phones- or othen.~se multi taskare tatgets of social opprobrium.) Although the instances of split-screen and multiple-screen filmmaking described at the beginning of this chapter suggest that the film spectator was increasingly equipped to engage "~th such ITactures in attention, tclevisual spectatorship much more directly encouraged the habits of a split-attentive viewer. The television's domestic site encouraged housewives to iron and fold laundry in front of the set, families to cat dinncr witb the TV on in the background, children to play with toys while watching cartoons. Channel switching, aided by accessory devices like the remote, implied dle inherent potential co engage in a "mode switch." By contrast, rhe computer user must engage with the computer screen dir:ectly, as it only responds to the user's interactive "input." Yet the computer user can- and easily does-split focus and attention to multiple tasks, since compute rs can now routi.ne.ly run multiple

applications: , each open in a diftCrc.nt window.
Multiple "windows" made computer "multit-JSking" possible. "'' As one Web dictionary defines "mt~titasking," it is · worki.ng with various computer programs ar one time in order to increase your prod.u ccivit}' and reach your i.ureuded goal."125 The windows interface made it easy for the user to switch back and forth between two documents or two applications. In order to theorize the subjective consequences of computer multitasking, we need to first consider the tcchn.it'.U base of m<~ciple-screen "windows." For a computer to multirask, the computer does tasks not simultaneously but serially, and yet at a high speed. (Even a slow computer w.ith a hundred- megahertz processor can e.~ecute a million instructions between each pair of keystrokes.) W hile a computer microprocessor can keep many programs running at the same time (parallel processing), the user still "crosscuts" between one or more programs in selective sequence. Just as the insrrume1 \tal base for the moving image-the retinal rete.!ltion of succe.-sive virtual images-produced a newly virtual representation of moveme1\t and a complex new experience of time, the instrumental base for multiscreen OJ<Lititasking poses new questions about the computer user's experie nce of time.

253

Computer multitasking makes it possibne to combine work with leisurcnmu.iug an E><cel spreadsheet wh.ile checking email or shopping on eBay-and hence serves to equate productivity with a fractured subjecrivity.u· A 1998 New York Tim<s article reported the following statistic: "Microsoft says the average office user of W indows 95 has more than three programs running at a time. At home, more than 10 million }\roe.rican households now bave a television and a personal computer in the same room."12' Screen-based multitasking is only one fo·m of multitasking. Using multiple screens (computers and Tvs) or engaging in multiple activities (talking on rhe

Tll'& M ULT IP L&

phone while "watching" TV) bas extended the meani ng of "nmltitasking" to a mo· 'e pervasive cultural mode. In asn·dy of American leisure time habits in zooo, < Ul MTV Networks/Viacom Study of Media, Entertainment, and Leisure T ime reported d1<tt Americans spend tin1e v.~tb media and euter~ainmenr 4·7 hours a day. For 2.9 of dtose hours, the aver.age American simultaneously reads magazines and watches 1.' V, listens to cos and sends email. T he. r esu.lts, the. study reports, imply that a multitaskc-.r's ave.rage .day has 29.8 hours of acr jvity.118 However, as another critic assesses d1c psychic: liabilities of technologically enabled multitasking: "Technology didn't give us more time, it just upp<:d the e.xpectations of what we could do in d1e same tim·e:' 129 As a further indication of the effects of ·m~titosk.ing on styles of learning and thinking, consider the following advice on time management offered to college students:"]VIulti-wi.udow, multi-task activity is the norm for roda/s studeots. E -mail, g-...nes, and web searches are routinely managed simwtaneously with writing papet-s or completing research assignments. Srudents have learned to \·.Uuc the pace. and accessibility of 'i deo presentations and sound-bite synopses of popular culmre. The slow, linear process of reading a book or attending a lecture may challenge astudenr's time management skills and attention to detail. Whae mult.i-msking can be a vah·able tool, so are fOcused attention and concentration. All are required for success in coUege."W A George \~'ashington University website offers the following recommendations:
JVIulti-window, multi-cask activity breaks concentration and consumes time rapidly. · Turn off or minimize y<)Ur pop up wjndows. Avoid screen dutter and eliminate distra.c tions. · Bre~k msks into manageable time blocks and stick to d1em. · PL' n rbe hours ofyour d ay (or study p<:riods) iu advance. Schedule ~ time to return e-maiL · Control interruptions o r even schedt~e xo minute breaks for 50
minute study periods.

234

I

· l'vbke allowances for periods of relaxation. · Exercise and strengrheu your ability to sustain concentration and absorb information by gradually increasing yonr srudy time and e.ffort until you reach an established goal. · Create a variety of study aids to help focus your attention (e.g., index cards, tables, diagrams.) · Aliow time. to stop and think about connections among course materials, f. 1cts, and findings.1:n
C H A I' T& R

5

This discussion of multitasking implies the direct cognitive cffc<:ts of multitasking behaviors. Is the fractured subjectivity of multitasking in service of productivity and efficienc)·? ls it a mode of technologically enhanced labor-saving to r the "human motor"? Docs the liberatorv rhetoric associated with multitask' ing (you <.an work where you want; take your compu ter to the beach or rhecafe) merely mask the increased expectations of ~4/7 productivity? (Do you really want your laptop at the beach?) Just as "alibi servers" help to e\Oide surveillance, euacting a redwolog. ical illusion of being elsewhere, computer "windows" can be alibi servers tor ideutiry: L1Lift tm the Screen, Sherry Turkle describes how computer windows work to produce ao identity with "distributed presence": ":VVindows provide a way for a computer to place you in several contexts at the same time .. . your identity on tl:te computer is the sum of your distributed prcsc.ncc."JJl Turkle portrays the. computer user as a ('decentralized selfJt who, cycling between different windows, has a fractured but multiple identity. w She ascribes this screen life its theoretical analogs:

[M)ore than tweuryyears afrer meeti ng the ideas ofLacan, Foucault, Deleuze. , a.od Guatcari, I am meeting them again in my nt""'' life on the screen. But this time the Gallic abstractions are more concrete.ln my compurer-mediated worlds, the self is multiple, fluid, and constituted in inter.lctioo with m<lchine cono.ec6ons; it is made and transformed by lang<·age; sexual congress is an exchange of signiiiers; and understandi ng foUows from navigation and tinkering rather than analysis. And in the machine-generated world of MUDS, I meet characters who put me in a new relationship with my own identity."'

I ···

fu a screen -based visual system, the "windows" interface subtly exponentiates what Erwin Panofsky described as the "unique and specific possibilities" of the cinema: the dynamization ofspace and the spa.tildizllti"'n ofi'ime. On the computer, we can be two {or more) places ~u once~ i.o nvo (or r note) rime frames, in two (or more) modes of identity, in a fractured post-Cartesian cyberspace, cybertimc.
AUGURI ES OF CONVERGENCE

The screen featured in a ·995 ad faces irs audience: rhe regimented rows of a computer keyboard, each key in the fixed position of a cinema spectator. The irnage-of th.e rransfonustive moment in Jl.1etropolis when the metallic robot Maria is infused with the life force of electricity-suggests another moment of

T H E MUI..T lPT.£

tra.osformation: the cinema screen has been replaced by its digital other, the

compute( screen.
By now, the once distinct material diifercnccs between cinematic, tclevi-

236

I

sual, and compur.er screens have vanished.l3-$'l"elevisions have.become more like computers: hard-disk video recorders (D\' RS such as TIVO, Replay TV) record television signals onto an auxiliary hard-drive; HDTv-ready TVS use chips running mega- MtPS. Conversely, computers have become more like televisions: MPEG arld QuickTime "mo,·ies" and "streaming" videos ftash across and tbcough Web browser pages. Networked multimedia home stations (Microsoft's X-box, Nintendo's G.tme C ube, Sony's Playstat.ion 2) combine the functions of telephone, television, and gaming console with the computer, and further confow1d the technical differentiation of film, television, and the. computer. The segregation of histories of telephony, moving-image, and computing technologies appears- in postrnillennial retrospect- to have been a set of arbitrary separations that disregarded the intermedW complexity of technological development. To write a "history" of these n<>w media formations is to encounter many familiar historio-graphical challengesY' As Stephen Heath warned in an earlier historical moment (1978), when the "cinematic apparatus" seemed a dominant technological form: "1echnological determinism substin·tes for the social, the economic, the ideological, proposes the random autonomy of invention and development, coupled often with the vision of a fulfillment of an abstract human essence-and some of the wildest versions of tlus latter are to be found in accounts of the (then aptly named) 'media: ... [Cinema's] history is a history of the rechnological and social togetl1er, a history in which the determinations are not simple but multiple, interacting. in which the ideological is there from the start."1>? \Vhile caa-eful not to overstate the determinations of t.echnological development, Heath and other apparatus theorists attempted to provide an account of the technological and social specificities of tl1e cinema as a single medium. In this way, we may wish to regardMar·shall McLuhan as the fitst apparan·s d1eorist. Back in 1964, when McLuban proclaimed, "the medium is the message," his sound-bite aphorism drew attention-not only to the mediation that the media implied, but also to the specificity of each separate medium. McLubaninveighed against a content-based study of the. media: "Tbe 'content' · of any medium;' he writes, "bliods us to the characteristics of the medium."'" Instead, McLuhan prescribes an analysis of tl1e effect.s- "the change of scale or pace or panern"- that each particular medium might prodttce. \'Vhile M cLtthan analyzed the interrelatedness of media in an evolutionary scheme ("The. contc.nt of any mediwn is always anothc.r medium»), 1311 he also insisted
CHAP'r ER

5

that each new medium would " 'institute new ratios, not onJy arnong our private senses, but among themselves, when they intc.ract among tbem selves.n1~ How, t'heu> do we account fOr the uut:\Y ratiosn produced by the rapid and recent
cltanges in the screens and interfaces of moving-image media? Nicholas Negroponte, :~nother M cLnhan -styled media prognosticator, offers a countecpolem.ical aphorism, turning McL,,J,an's "The medium is the message" on its head. Negropoute declues: "The medium is nor the message in the digital world. It is an embe>diment of ir. A message might h.:w e several embodiments automatically derivable rrom rhe same data."" ' For Negro ponte, digital technology dissolves the specificity of individual media: digital imaging, delivery, aud display etiectively er:~se tlte messages implicit in the source mediwu. Negropoure proclaims: "The basic difference between today's Tvs and PCs has nothing to do with loc:<tion, social habits, or our need to relax. It has to do with how the bits arrive."'" If we foU o·· Ncgropoure's axiom ("the medium is not the.message in the digital world")) we arrive at a newfound dete.rminjsm: digital wctmology inherently im plies a convergence of aU media forms. Ge!'man media theorist Frie<irich Kittler anticipated this loss of media speciJi.city when he wrote (in t986), "The general digitali:tation of information and channels ernses the difference between individual medi:t.""' Yet Kittler predieted that the installation of fiber- optic cable-and not me phone wu·es or the Internet or tbe. wireless fu ture of the Web- would be the technology to turn .film, televisio!~·· music, and phone. calls into a ''single medium." The changes in screens and Ollf "interfuces" with them have oc~'l>rred at the speed of fast-forward. But have the screens of cinema, television, aod compt·ter really lost their apparatical distinctions? A recent sales website fo r tlat-sc!'eeu monitors conflates the multiple functions of the screen-'rv, movie display, Internet browser-now displayed within the same electronic pi.cture frame: Hanging on a waU they look more like art rad1e!' than a TV set. \ ¥heo you' re not watchi ng Tv, ovo videos, surfing the ner or reading your e- mail, there is no need to switch the plasma panel off. It can be used as an electronic picture frame~ with a continuously changing selection of artworks of your choice: An endless art collection!'" Or, as rhe Consumer Electronics Association predicted in zooz:

238

1

ln the ultimate J iving room, ·tvs and music don~t stand alone; they interact with each other , with the lnte. rnet, with the PC in dle home
office or the clccrronic.game equipment in the fi< mily room.t·s
5

CHA P T ER

Auguries of convergence always suggest a teleology: some media are seen as ttansitional) while others see.m desti ned to evolve into the uext species. A media paleontologist could examine tbe fossil remains: the VCR may h<tve bcgtul to erode the diff:Crenccs between tclevisual and dne.matic vieniog; the ovo may have became the delivery format to serve the displays of computers and televisions alike. New-generation gaming consoles offer features that include. ovo players, output jacks for Htn·v, broadband connections, and hard drives for storing music and games. W hile newer iterations of the gaming console seem poised to further bridge t.he gap berween rhe digital world of the personal computer and the analog world of television, one cannot predict what delivery or display format will sun·ive the vicissitudes of the consumer market. There. have been earlier attempts at marketing d1e convergence of television, computer, and cinema screens that tailed. In ' 993· Apple introduced the "Macintosh -rv," a convergence appliance that anticipated a l1 ybrid computer·user/televisionvlewc.r who would use cl1e sa.me CRT screen as a television receiver and computer display. But Apple decided the market wasn't. there: the Mac TV was discontinue.d almost before it began.1'' ln 1996, "\~1eb-r v," an Jnternetappliancemarketed to users who might want to access the Web on their television screens, iolagined a convergence that }))passed the personal computer. Tbc convergent screen of Microsoft's x P Media Center is positioned ro fulfiU these earlier promises. 'I1le television sct-een {big screen, plasma screen, vco screen) is now coequal with the pixels of computer "display." ''Nt.·v/ ' media imply the eve.r-obso!cscenoc.of the "old., As Antonio Gramsci put it: "the old is dying and the. new cannot be. born; in this interregnum a great variety of morbid symptoms appe-ar.""' And yet, amid these morbid symptoms, the continued engagement with a ''virtual window" seems somehow assured.

I

239

T H f~

MULT IJ' l. fj

c.t

Andy \V;arhol, SuinJ~. t96J· Synthetic polytuc:r paint and ~ilkKl'(:(n ink QU anw$. @The Andy WathoJ Fouod:uioofOf't.he Vi~ Am./,'t~ts, ~r. Phor!Y. The- Andy Warhol Fouochllon,lnc./Att Rcsoun>c,

New YOfk..

-French mdio announcement of the dc~th of Gilles Ddcuv::

'')95· philosopher Gilles DeJeuze committed suicide by throwing himself or jumping out of the window of his Paris a)'Xtrtment. We might recall some ofDeleuze's own wriringabonr rhe windo·w, rhe closed system of the fr~tme and tl1e "out-ot:6cJd· (hm-s-champ) of representational space as we ask, \~'hat '"''s the fatal lure of penetrating the spate of the wic>dow into the great beyond?' "Doors, windows, box office windo< vs. skylights, car windows. mirrors, :ore all frames;' wrote Dele\1".«: in Cine· ma z: 'The M011tmfnt-lmogt. "The great directors have particular affinities with parcicularsccondacy, tertiary etc. frames ," he continues. "And it is by this dovetaili ng of fi1unes that the parts of the set or of the closed system are separated, but also couverge and llre reunired."' The frame of the screen is a closed system, a pri1lt:u y c.ontainer for inset secondary and tertiary fromes that may recede jn mise en abyme, buc also converge to reuni te within a gt3nder but still bounded fr·ame. Yet, for Deleuze, there is always a beyond, ourside this frame, an "o\lt--of-lield; ''more "r<1 dical elsewhere." "All frami.I1g derermines >n our-of-fidei [!.>on-champ]":"]none case, d1e our-of-fielc! desjgn:nes tl1at which cxi:,-ts elsewhcre to one side or arotmd; in the other case, the out-of··ficld testifies to a more disntrbing presence, one "~uch caonor even be said to exist, but rarher ro 'insist' or 'subsist: a more radical elsewhere, outside homogeneous space and time~ In his death, Deleuze found <ius elsewhere, outside of the frame.
1 1

1N NOVEM a P.R

For the rest of us- left fJci ng the window, the frame, the screen-we might wonder: Is there a oe·w logic to vision as our windows, frames. screens are ever more. fractured and virtually multiplied? \>Vhich teduJologies will break thro ugh the frame aud have us climb through the virtual window? And which will have us stay fixed -nose to the glass (or as the French say about windowshopping, lecher lcs ·vitrincs, "to lick the windows")-in front of the windows, caught in the hold of an image, framed in display?' This book took shape while the screens of cinema, television, aud computer began to converge, gradually losing their appararical distinctions.' Now, a variety of screens- long and wide and square, large aud small, composed of grains, composed of pixels, lit by projected U ght, cathode-ray tube, plasma, Len- compete for our attention without any convincing argmneots about hegemony. Screens are "display and deUvery" fo rmats-variable in versions of projection scrt>en, TV

screen, computer screen, or hand-he.ld device. "Film" is a "stora.ge" mediumvariable in versions of video, ovns, compttter hard drive, databank, online server.

Spectators are "users" or "players~ wirh an 4 in terface"--variable in versions of
remotes, mice, keyboards, touch screens, joysticks, goggles and gloves and body suits. J ust as the chem ically based, analog images of photography have been replaced by digital images, the "cinema" has ix.'<:tL dispbced by systems of circu!arion and tmnsmission that abolish the projection screen and link the screens of the computer aud television with the dialogic iuceractivity of the r.e lephoo.e. In the ·cinematic century"-seen now in the 20/ 20 of retrospective

>·· I

'\'jsjon"-the viewer remained im.rnobile- in front of the frame-of the.screen. As we begin this new centul)i the "postcinemati~ "post-tclcvis-ual'· vie. '"'er has new
forms of ever-virtual mobili ry-n<"· speeds of access to deep hisrories of images and text, newly mobilized screelllS that travel in airplanes and automobiles, screens that c;1n be hau d-beld and wireless. As public buildings and domestic spaces boast image- bearing glass skins, as large-screen tdcvisio ns are big enough

and flat enough r.o substitute for r;eal windows, as "windows" widlin our computer screens stream images from multiple sources) as \'irtuat reality technologies
expand fro m the gaming world int<l entertainment or daily services, tbe "virtual window'' has become a ubicruitous jl<lrt:tl-a ''wormhole"-to pasts and fimtres. In 1 915, D. W. Gr·iffith imagined a 1\rture library where o ne could sit in fro nt of a "properly adjusted wi ndow" and "actually see what bappened" in the past: I magine a public library of the near future, for instance. There will be long rows ofboxe.· or pillars, properly classified aud indexed of coul'\le. At each box a push button and before eacll box a seat. Suppose you wish to "re·d up" · cerrnin episode in Napoleon's life. Instead of con-

CONC L US IO N

suiting all the authorities, wading through a host of books, and ending bewildered without a clear idea of exacdy what did happen, >·ou ·will

merely seat yourselfat a properly adjusted wimJQW ir1 a .<cier~tijica!ly prepared room, press the butto11 andachtally see what happened .. . 1'here will be no (lpiniom expreJJerl. You ":.!Jili merdy hepreunt a.t the making rfbi.uqyy.6
Griffith's prediction capwred an insight about his centus)?s "new" technology for storing time, yet he imagined a "properly adjusted window'' as ideologicaUy transpasent-he did not acknowledge any mediations to the "history picture" it would record. Alberti's fifteenth-century metaphor of the window served to frame the geometric, geophysical world, arranging the above., below, ahead, and behind on the flat fmmed plane of representation. Alberti's window was not a transparent "window on the world," but it provided us with a Renaissance root for a "windowed elsewhere"-a virtual space that exists on the virmal plane of represeomtion. In Alberti's schema, there was no absolute size, only proportions relative to the human measure: "Large, small, long, short, high, low, wide, narrow, light, dark, bright, gloomy, and everything of the kind [magmun, parvum, lcngum, hreve1altum, · inji· mum, latun1) a. 1·r.tttm, darum, ohscu.rum, !uminosum) tetubro.sum et hu£uJmorli omm1. which philosophers tcn·nerl accidents, because they may or may nor be present in rhing~. all these are such as to be known only by
cornpa.rison.""

I 243

T he screens of the twenty-first century are large, small, long, short, higb, low, wide, narrow, light, dark, bright, gloomy, artd known by their relative measure to the buman scale. And yet, as the dis;play screens of movies, television, and che computer begin to grow more similar to each other, a new logic to fr:lmed visuality rakes hold. The windo"'s metaphoric boundary is no longer the singular frame oi perspective-as beholders of nmltiple-scrcen "windows," we now see the world in spatially and tem porally fractured fumes, through "vir-

tual windows" that rely more on the multiple and simulmneous r J'Ia!l on the sin-

g.,Jar and seqttential..
T his book has engaged i.o a split optic, a historical parallax. Rcn:lli.-sauc-e pcrspecti,·e negotiated a new relation between the near and the fur, organi7.ed along the vanishjng point of a single line of vision. By analogy, this book negotiates the now and tbe then, the near and the f.u of technology refracted dtrough the foreshortened focal length of the present. In this way, J've brought 6fteentbcenrory theories of perspective, seventeenth-cenrury d> eories of optics and the mind, nineteenth-<.-entury devices <U>d visual pmct<ccs, and rwcnt<cth -century mo,<ing-image media onto the flattened plarte of the present, held next to each
Tl'l& t·u ·ruR& OF W I NDOW S

other and yet seen through s J<j,Jeidoscope of critil:'ll lenses. Descartes's window, Heidegger's fi"'ame, Bergson's virtu::tl, nnd Virilio's scree.n comhlnc to give ns an optic tlu-ough which we c:1n see these changes in modern vi..suality. Ratht~r than simply provide a technological account, they give us a philosophical and subjec·
tive sense of those change!t-and of their consequences.

Meanwhile, the llcxt generation-today's ter··year-olds-are transfLxed in front of screens full of images driven by X- Boxes or PlayStMions or G am e-

Cubes, IVith "c011troU ers" in their hands. Or they multi~·sk-doing homework 3SSignments, researching on the Web, redesigning their m y space page, while IMing with friends. T hey are living deep in their own virtually rendered clscwhcrcs,
and yet, Like the generations bef o re them, the. y sit in front of the frame of a "wiudow."Their inter:tc· tion with the snccn may be di fferent, but if it is, it makes the intt:Htsigence of the fmme a chilli11g const::~n t, one wirh ine.'(otable t.'UitunU power. Or perhaps, as films like E,,:i.<tenZ, The Matrix, and Strauge Days predict, the screen may dissolve; images and data will be "up[o,tdcd" di.retdy, byp~ss ing the eye and the optics of vision. T lus new cir· cuitry tak<. -s us beyond and through the wi ndow1 a del-enestr:(ltion that has new risks and pleasures. In r h.is vision, the "~ge of windows"- :1n.d by exre nsion, the "ge of screens-has, as H. G . Wells pre· dieted, reached its end.

<:..2 Sony Memory StKk ad. 1 999·

CONCLUS l ON

POS TL OGU E 2005
It is difficult to write ;~bout the immedi,~te of media, di.fliculr t.o analpe the pervasive present ever slipping """ ·Y· This ·book was written amid the byperspeed of technological change; it began long before our television screens began to look like websites, before our computer screens routinely contained moving images, and before movies looked like both. As time wore on and the technological Sllllpsbor of the present kept changing, 1 fou nd it necessary to add richer historical and tl> eoretical detail, taking some steps backward from the digital present to detail how the P'·st presses its nose up ag-Ainst the glass of the future. But this book was also written in an era of"posts"-the post- to modern.iry, the post- to colonialism, the post- to the millennium, the post- to 9/n-as if d> e present can be understood only as an epilogue itself, an end.iog after the end. We can know the past only in terms of how it has been constructed fo r us, in terms of how e··ideuce appears to us now, mediated through the lenses of the present. This book has tried to provide <U> account not of how we got to here, but of whe('e we~ve come from. When 1 wrote Wi11do.v Shqppiug, I wanted to 31"[\'Ue l10w deeply movingimage media had permeated our cons<:iousness, how they had changed our access ro history and to the past. ] argu·ed rhat postmodernity could be understood only as a consequence of the creeping centra1ity ol mediated modes of visuality and in terms of the virtual mobilities in everyday life. 1 offered an account of subjectivity-a temporally confused subjectivity- in the mediasaturated firs t world, a world where the commodit)' fetish set the rule of culture. But tbe ·mobili'<ed and virtual ga-<e" was not- <md iJ not- the global norm. Nor are there easy generalizations to make about consciousness itself. An individuafs relation to space and to time is mediated by a range of determinantsincluding geographical place in the w<>rld, access to media, religious belief, psychological state. Tbis book, like Windqw Shopping, attempts to provide ··~ account of the subjectivities of people in the most mediated provinces of the first wodd. 1 have been drawn to philosophies that attempt to coocepmalize the ways in which our bodies and m.inds move and think in the everyday. T he drives of tcchnophiliaL ust for efficiency, mobility, accelerated modes of experience- produce changes that are both gradual and dramatic. Yet these changes require chat we confront the sad truth of their price- a consequence that has been termed a "digital divide" but is less about the digital chan about another more deeply rent divide. AU agonistic accounts require a theory of rupture., an account of the break. T he coUa.pse of the World Trade Tow. e rs provided a dramatic visual turning

point, a break that fo rced a change in all accounts of the interdependence of global and technological change. The dlsintegration of two massive towers of glass and steel had an explosive epistemological charge. As the writer A. M . Homes recounted in tbc New Y<>rk Times: "I see the plane, and I see the plane crash into the building. I see the buildings burn, and I see the buildings fall down. I see imagery that until now did not exist in reality, ooty in the fiction of film. Seeing it with yotrr own eyes, in real time- not oo a scJ"een, not protec -ted by the fnuneof a television set, not in the communal darkness of a movie theater -seeing it like this is irreconcilable, like a hallucination, a psychotic break."' A. M. H omes w-·s unprotected by the frame or by the screen. \~1hile many wished that the images of <j/n were only a movie or television special effect, the towers of glass and steel remain only in the immaterial archive of memory and in the archive of photographs and films that retain them. The film remains after the building fades: t he ephemcrol materiality of the Twill Towers-and the lives extinguished inside them -has been imparted to the arcb.ival immateriality of photographic, filmic, and television images. In many ways, this implosive inversion of our technologies- aircraft turned into missiles against buildings on our own shores-is more and more

2·s

I

possible as iear has lost its borders. Terrorism is made possible by modern medi"-funded by a transnational credit economy, organi-zed by the decentered networks of the lntemet. Chemic:al agents can be sent through the postal system. D iseases can cross borders and refute the metaphors of quarantine. The only way to counte. r tbe rhetoric ()f fear is to dc:x::onstruct it, to teach cynicism and doubt and critical reading. Here, I've struggled to add an appropriate epilogue to this book, one written from the cusp of new realizations about how the frame fu nctions, about the coUapse of borders and boundaries, and about how mobility has changed its valence. As a book- wciter at the end of the twentieth century, I found that my writing process was facilitated-or perhaps hindered- by word- processing software that encouraged holding· each chapter open in overlapped windows, with easy "copy" and "paste" changes made without regard to lioe·r logic. Computer-assisted writing is fu rther enabled (or d isabled) by the easy switch between the deep desktop of "ofliline" appGcations and "ontine" sources with search engines and text archives available on the very same screen. T he. blank "page" is now an upright screen, but not a blank screen. It bas toolbars and desktop icons and many "windows."ln fact, one.of the inset frnrnes on my computer screen contains a little Microsoft .ma.,cot-an inset "window" chat opens to a c-artooned computer with its own belly- like screen-{! foggy blne eyeball in the socket of a monitor with feet. T llis creature taps its foo r and nods, yawns and

J>OSTLOGU:E 2005

do:r..es, sits and wiggles jts toes- an impish avatar of the computer·s solipsistic pull. Lt daily screeds, 1 fomented against the liabilities of multitasking and the toll that it " "IS .taking on my ever- more fractured subjectivity. If thefldneur and
jliineuse were models for the subject in nineteenth- and twentieth-century modemit)', the multimsker is their twenty-firs t-century heir. Despite my own wild technopbilia, I develop..> d a rc<>ctionary nostalgia for the fixity and simplic ~ ity of a single-window view.
My argument i.n rhis book largely sidesteps the new configurations of global, t.l'Msnationa.l, and borde.rless networiks, of how the border and boundaries of nation-stat£s 110 longer co11trol dte sovereignry of peoples. Glassmaking was invCilted in the sands oflVIesopot.ami-a-now l mq. fslamic research into optics was of determinant importance to all subsequent optical theory. The demateriali·t.ations made possible by solid yet transparent planes of glass take on a new significance as we look into ne.wly mediated windO\YS, with new iJtoriae.
to be seen.

1 247

J·OST LOCU f. ZOOS

