Worlds Made byWords
SCHOLARSHIP AND COMMUNITY IN THE MODERN WEST

Anthony Grafton ,

,
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS

"

Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London, England · 2009

T

Copyright © 2009 by Anthony Grafton

All rights reserved Printed in the United States' of Arrienca:·

Library _of.Congress Cataloging-in-:Publication Data
Grafton, Anthony. Worlds made by words : scholarship and community' in the modern West I Anthony Grafton. p. em.

Includes bibliograp,hical references and index.
2. Learning and scholarship=--United States-History. 3. Europe-Civilization. 4. EuropeIntellectual life. I. Title. CB245.G65 2009 940.1-dc22 2008041248

ISBN 978-0-674-03257-6 (alk.,;paper) 1. Learning and scholarship-Europe, Western-History.

Contents

Acknowledgments Introduction
I

IX

I

A Sketch Map of a Lost Continel;)t: The Republic of Letters

9 35 56 79 98
114

2 A Humanist Crosses Boundaries: , · Alberti on "Historia" and "Istoria"
3

A Contemplative Scholar: Trithemius Conjures the Past The World in a Room: Renaissance Histories qf Art and Na!ure Where Was Salomon's House? Ecclesia~cal History and the Intellectual Origins of Bacon's New Atlantis Chronology, Controversy, and Comm~ity in the Republic ,. of Letters: The Case of Kepler The Universal 'Language: Splendors and SorrowsofLatii:t in the Modern World Entrepreneurs of the Soul, Impresarios of Learning: The Jesuits In No Man's Land: Christian Learning and the Jews

4 5 6
7

137 160 176

8
9

viii

Contents

10
11

The History of Ideas: Precept and Practice, 1950-2000 and Beyond The Messrs. Casaubon: Isaac Casaubon and Mark Pattison Momigliano's Method and the Warburg Institute: Studies in His Middle Period The Public Intellectual and the American University: Robert Morss Lovett

188 216 231 255 271 2'88 327
415

12 13

14 The Public Intellectual and the Private Sphere: Arendt and Eichmann at the Dinner Table c

IS Codex in Crisis: The Book Dematerializes
Notes Sources Index

417

15
Codex in Crisis
The Book Dematerializes

Alfred Kazin began work in 1938 on his first book, On Native Grounds. Thf child of poor and diffident Jewish immigrants in Brooklyn, he stndied at City College. While uninspired professors processed large classes and Stalinistil and Trotskyites tnrned the cafeteria into a battleground, Kazin-;omehow de· · veloped a passion for literature and began to write reviews. He had money or backing, yet he managed to put together an extraordinary, com· prehensive book, to tell the sto~y of the !,reat American intellectual andliter· ·. ary movements from the late nineteenth centnry to his own time and to set · them in a richly evoked historical co.;t~. One institution made his work .· possible: the New York Public Library at Fifth Avenue and Forty-second Street, where he spent almost five years. As Kazin later recalled:

Anything I had heard of and wanted to see, the blessed place owned: first editions of American novels out of those germinal decades after the Civil War that led to my theme of the "modern"; old catalogues from long-departed Chicago publishers who had been young men in the 1890s trying to support a little realism; yellowing, crumbling, but intact sets of the old Masses (1911-1918), which was to the Stalinist New Masses what St. Francis is to the Inquisition. The library's holdings taught him "what hope, elan, intellectual freshness C:une with those pioneer realists out of the Middle West who said there was no runerjcan literature but the one they were rushing to create." Without leaving Manhattan, Kazin read his way into "lonely small towns, prairie villages, isolated colleges, dustf law offices, national magazines and provincial 'acadc· mies' where no one suspected that the obedient-lookingyoung reporters, law

The Book Dematerializes

289

clerks, librarians, teachers would turn out to be Willa Cather, Robert Frost, Sinclair Lewis, Wallace Stevens, Marianne Moore." 1 Kazin and his close friend Richard Hofstadter, with whom he shared quick lunches at the Automat, fast games of ping-pong, and an occasional afternoon of newsreels, were only two of the countless writers, readers, and critics who over the centuries have found themselves and their subjects in libraries. It is an old story, quiet and reassuring: bookish boy or girl enters the cool, dark library and discovers loneliness and freedom. For the last ten years or so, however, the cities of the book have been anything but quiet. The computer and the Internet have transformed reading more dramatically than anything since the printing press. In great libraries from Stanford to Oxford, pages turn, scanners hum, databases grow-and the world ofbooks, of copyrighted information and repositories of individual copies, trembles. Scenarios for the apocalypse have often involved books: Revelation mentions letters, describes a book with seven seals; and uses the closing of a book as a vivid metaphorfor the end of the physical world: "And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together" (6:14). But at the beginning of the twenty-first century, the rhetorical situation l;tas reversed itself. Great information projects, mounted by Google and rival companies, have elicited millenarian prophecies about texts as we know them: claims that the printed :· book, magazine, and newspaper are as dead as the trees their paper comes from, and predictions that digital repositories of human knowledge will not only replace but will also improve on them. In 2006, Kevin Kelly, the self. styled "chief Maverick" of Wired, published one of the more influential of l;hese in the New York Times. In a thoughtful review of the intricate legal issues associated with digitizing books in copYfight, Kelly vividly describes the virtuallibrary that Google and its rivals and partnors are creating. In the near future, Kelly believes, "all the books in the· world" will "become a single liquid fabric of interconnected words· and ideas." The user of the electronic library will be able to bring together "all texts-past and present, multilingual-on .a particular subject," and by doing so ''a clearer sense of what we as a civilization, a species, do know and don't know. The white spaces of our collective ignorance are highlighted, while the golden peaks of our knowledge are drawn with completeness;"' Others have evoked even more millennia! prospects: a universal archive that will contain not only all books and artiCles but also .all documents everywhere; the basis for a total history of the human race.

gain

j

290

CODEX IN CRISIS

Librarians, publishers, professors, printers-all of us are fascinated by the prospect that such prophets conjure up: a future in which readers in search of information always turn to screens rather than books, and, as e-books improve, even readers in search of pleasure begin to do the same. This prospect infuriates some acolytes of the book: for example, Jean-Noel Jeanneney, historian and former director of the Bibliotheque Nationale de France, who in 2005 published a sad little volume in which he denounced Google Books as a typical American plot, at once imperialist and boorish, rather like the war in Iraq. Google, he argued, win first fill the Web with books in English and then profit by distorting the world of learning and literature. Only energetic countermeasures--preferably sponsored by national governments rather than corporations--can save European literature and scholarship.' Instinct and experience predispose me to find some substance in critiques of the new textual world. I am a lover of old libraries-the libraries of the 1960s and I 970s, in which I became i. scholar. As a student in those years, I lived in what felt like a bibliomaniac's paradise and in retrospect still seems to have been an idyll. Books and journals were cheap, and library budgets were healthy. Even in the United States, the stacks-of good libraries from Connecticut to California were loaded With sixteenth- and seventeenth-century tomes that no one had yet declared rife, as well as reprmts of anything the library did not possess in its original form. I prowled,the vast open-stack collections at the University of Chicago, where I studied, and Cornell and Princeton, where I taught, pulling books off the shelves by dozens, as fascinated by what they could tell me about nineteenth- and twentieth-century scholars and students as by what they revealed about the more distant past I studied. As a New Yorker, like Kazin, I also loved to sit in the shabby but dignified reading rooms of the New York Public Library, waiting for the indicator to show that my books had arrived. In those days, many libraries did not have coffee shops, and those that had one were Jnore likely to provide vending rna. chines than fresh espresso and cappuccino. Nonetheless, they became a chosen hangout, for me and for others like me. Late in the 1970s, when I learned that the Princeton library had identified me as a "heavy user,'' I was not surprised, though the choice of terminology worried me a little. The love of lib~es hru; taken me to strange and wonderful places: to the British Library in London,_ still housed in the 1970s under the pale blue nineteenth-century dome that sheltered Karl Marx, Coli;, Wilson; and other outsiders; to the Warburg Insti-

,/

rs

The Book Dematerializes

291

e

lute, also in London, whose founder and successors arranged their books by what they called the "good neighbor principle," so that readers who looked for a particular book in the stacks would be surprised and edified by the others next to it; to the Bodleian Library, the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris, the Bibliotheek der Rijksuniversiteit te Leiden, and the Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana. One of the many things I have learned from years misspent amid the smells of dust and noble rot is that every library embodies a perspective of its own. Their contents, the way in which manuscripts and books are catalogued and arranged on shelves, and their gaps-all tell stories to those who can listen, about writers, readers, and collectors, and the historical worlds they inhabited. Scholars become great when they attend to what these purpose-built collections, with their distinctive systems '\fld oral traditions, have to teach. No one has described the austerely local nature of humanistic scholarship more precisely than the historian Peter Brown, who traces his own formation to the time he spent in the Lower Reading Room of the Bodleian Library: It was a world of books, each deeply rooted in the landscape of a single library. They were available in one place only, for rapt readers, who, themselves, had taken on something of the quality of natural features. They were visible year after year at their desks. Over'the years, from 1953 to 1978, I passed from status to status. In these years, my mind changed <_>ften. But in the Lower Reading Room of Bodley nothing seemed to change. Opposite me, for instance, th~re always sat a known authority on the relation between Augustine's Scriptural readings and the liturgy of Hippo. He was not a member of the university. He was a clergyman who came up regularly from his vicarage in the countryside of Oxfordshire. I observed that he wore bedroom slippers. Frequently, the slippers appe')fedto win out over the books, and he wonld fill asleep. A prim young man at il:hat time, I wondered if I could really trust the views of so somnolent a· person on the Donatist schism. But the reverend gentleman stood for a wider world oflearning, open to more professions and capa-· hie of nourishing many more forms of scholarly endeavor than that which I now expect to find, among my colleagues, in a seminar, room. It was for persons such as hirn-,-"-for personsoflearrting and of general culture, who were not necessarily academics-as well as for my students and c_olleagues at Oxford, that I wrote. my Augustine of Hippo, and went

292

CODEX IN CRISIS

out of my way to ensure that it would be published iu England by Faber's of London and not by a University Press. Figures such as these communicated the uncanny stillness of a shared life oflearniug.4 To have known reading in this artisanal form is to distrust any plan that treats books as interchangeable and aims-as Google does-at universality. But it would be absurd to joiu Jeanneney's crusade. Enter a word or phrase in any European language iu the Google Books search field and you learn immediately that the system already contains thousands of texts in languages other than English. As to the French goveinment, its last great gift to the world of books was the library that Jeanneney directed, a buildiug that looks like the set from some forgotten dystopian sci-fi film of the 1970s-thiuk Logan~ Run-and is about as much fun to work iu. As a liberal, iu the current AngloAmerican sense, I believe that competent governments do many thiugs better than markets can, but I am not at all sure that France's statist way of providing books for readers is a case in po_iut. The Bibliothl:que Nationale deserves credit for its own database, Gallica, which offers a canon ·<{"'3Jfefully selected texts, well digitized, and for its provision of up!to-aate foreign books. But it has yet to show that it can, or wants to, mobilize ;md make accessible to the world a vast, disorderly mass of texts, canonical and nontanonical, for readers to use freely. Many American and British librarians are exuberant about the prospect of briuging the books iu their custody to new publics, through new ll)edia, and anyone can see why. After all, one thiug that Google Books makes clearer every day is that you can study many aspects of French thought and literature as deeply iu New York as in Paris, and a lot more efficiently.

The·Universal Library Theproblem is how to understand what is happeniug right now, as-we all try to·remaiustanding agaiust the tidal waves of traditional books and new media that are breakiug over us. One vital point, and an easy one to miss, is that the Internet" will not iu fact bring us a universal library-much less an encyclopedic record of all human experience. None of the firms now engaged in digitization projects daims thaUt will create anythiug of the kiud; The hype and rhetoric that reverberate around the Web make it hard to grasp what Google and their partner libraries are actually doiug, what readers will and

CODEX IN CRISIS

The Book Dematerializes

293

1gland by Faber's ts these commu-

ust any plan that -at universality. a word or phrast· nd you learn imlCts in languages gift to the world at looks like the

-think Logan:,
current Anglo· y things better y ofproviding 'nale deserves selected But it

will not have access to in the next ten or twenty years. We have dearly reached something of a watershed, a new era in the history of text production and consumption. On many fronts, traditional periodicals and books are making way for blogs, computer databases, and other electronic formats. But magazines and books still sell a lot of copies. The current drive to digitize the written record is one of a number of aitical projects in the long saga of our drive to accumulate, store, and.retrieve information efficiently. It will result not in the infotopia that the prophets conjure up, but in one more in a series of new information ecologies, all of them challenging, in which readers, writers, and producers of text have learned to survive and flourish. For centuries--for millennia-the scribes and sd10lars who produced books often were also the ones who organized them in collections and devised ways ofhelping readers find and master what they needed. As early as the third millennium BCE, Mesopotamian scribes began to catalogue the tablets in their collections. For ease of reference, they appended content descriptions to the edges of tablets, and they adopted systematic shelving for quick identification of related telCts. The greatest of ancient collections, the Li~ of Alexandria, had, in its ambition and its methods, a good de.al ~-common ~th Go ogle's efforts. It was founded around 300 BCE by Ptolemy I, who had inherited Alexandria, a brand-new city, from Alexander the Great. A historian with a taste for poetry, Ptolemy decided to amass a comprehensive collection of Greek literature, philosophy, and science. Like Google, the library developed an efficient pro~edure for capturing and reproducing texts. When ships docked in Alexandria, any scrolls found on them were confiscated and taken to the library. The staff made copies for the owners and stored the originals in heaps until they could be catalogued-a fact that gives some idea of the scale of the operation. Copies of Homer obtained this way were designafed "those fr~m ships." At the'collection's height, it contained more than half a million scrolls, a welter of ip.formation that forced librarians to develop new organizational methods. For the first time, texts were shelved alphabetically. Faced with this daunting mass, the poet and scholar Callinmchus drew up comprehensive bibliographies. Enterprising forgers had run up so many fake' texts to satisfy . the library's appetite that he had to distinguish systematically between the . genuine works of the· great poets and the spurious ones that the library also · possessed. Gradually, the library became a center of focused sd1olarship, where a. series oflibrarians__.:.Zenqdotus of Ephesus, Aristophanes ofByzan·

._,

..

1,.

294

CODEX IN CRISIS

tium, and Aristarchus of Samothrace-corrected and commented on classic

texts. Many details of their work, only partially preserved after the destruction of the library, remain controversial. Yet it seems clear that they not only devised new philological methods but also standardized the text of Homer that circulated in Egypt during the Hellenistic and Roman periods-a major achievement in an age when every text was copied by hand. 5 Six hundred years after Callimachus, Eusebius, a historian and bishop of the seacoast city of Caesarea in Palestine, assembled and corrected Christian sources in the local library. There he also devised a complex network of
cross-references, known as ""canon tables," which enabled readers to find

I·''

'

',-,,

parallel passages in the four Gospels-a system that the distinguished modem scholar James O'Donnell recently described as the world's first set of hot links. A deft impresario, Eusebius mobilized a team of secretaries and scribes to produce Bibles featuring his new tables. The emperor Constantine acknowledged that Eusebius had developed a uniquely efficient system. In the 330s, he placed an order with the bishop for fifty parchment codex Bibles for the chnrches of his new city, 'Constantinople.J::onstantine himself supplied the necessary skins (in the age of manuscript('blo'od sacrifice was the price of beautiful books), and sent them to Ells$ius by the imperial rapid delivery service. He knew. that only the scriptorium in Caesarea conld tum the raw materials into accurate, properly formatted _bibles in the short time he allowed.6 Throughout the Middle Ages, the great monastic libraries continued ·to engage in the twin enterprises of accumulating and cataloguing large holdings and, in their scriptoria,.makillg and disseminating copies of key texts. The rise of printing in fifteenth-century Europe transformed the regimes oflibrarians and readers. Into a world alniady literate and curious, the printers brought, within half a century, some28,000 titles and millions of individual books-many times more than Ellropean libraries had previously held. Reports of new worlds,· new theologies, and new ideas about the universe traveled faster and sold for lower prices than ever before, Even in this period of aggressive expansion, the traditional skills oflearned librarians continued to find employment in the enn:epreneurial world of printing. Giovanni Andrea Bussi, librarian of the papal collection of Sixtus IV, also served as .advisor to two German printers in Rome, Conrad'Sweyoheym and Arnold Pannartz. They printed the classics and the church fathers in handsome editions· that were siguificantly cheaper than manuscripts. Lo-

,,

CODEX IN CRISIS

The Book Dematerializes

295

·nd commented on classic

eserved after the destrucs clear that they not only jized the text of Homer
:Jman periods-a major

hand. 5 tistorian and bishop of nd corrected Christian complex network of abled readers to find ' distinguished mod>orld's first set of hot
cretaries and scribes

or Constantine ac:ient system. In the nt codex Bibles for ' himself supplied ce was the price of ial rapid delivery rud turn the raw llort time he al:aries continued ling large hold·ofkeytexts. 'd the regimes pus, the print!ls ofindivid\viously held. ~e universe

cal scholars, thrilled by the speed and economy of the new process, made the tranquil gardens of the Vatican resound with their praises. Bussi edited and corrected their copy and sometimes added eloquent prefaces to their books. Like many first movers, however, Bussi and his partners soon learned that they had overestimated the market, which could not absorb editions that ran from a few hundred toJUore than a thousand copies. They found themselves-as Bussi eloquently complained to pope Sixtus IV-in a Roman palace full of the drying sheets they had printed but empty offood. 7 They were not the last entrepreneurs of new information technologies to experience this kind of difficulty. Still, the model Bussi helped to establish-one in which erudite scholars advised hardheaded printers--remained standard in the sixteenth century, and some of the printers who rejected it did so only because they themselves were learned men, who conld choose and correct their own copy. Over the next three centuries, the profit-driven industry of publishing and the industrious scholarship of theilibraries became separate spheres. Yet in the last few years, as sales of urtiversity press books have dwindled and journal subscription prices have gone.through thp-FGjlf. this ancient model has been resurgent. Through their electrortic publlshing programs, libraries have begun to take on many of the tasks that traditionally fell to urtiversitypresseS, such as distribution of PhD dissertations and reproduction oflocal book and document collections. Ithaka, a nonprofit consrutancy that issued a report on scholarly publishing in Jwy 2007, noted the excitement that these new possibilities had · generated among librarians.' Irofti.cally, neither the consnltants nor the many commentators on their work realized that in regairting partial control over the ways that tex!soare processed and made available, great libraries were not breaking new ground but going back t,o the future. The new electrortic library that not ocly sto~es texts but also publishes them on its Web page, is engaging in a spread of activities that Eusebius}vonld have found perfectly natural. Fast, .reliable methods of seatch and .retrieval are sometimes identified as the hallmilik of our information age: "Search is eve,rything" has become a proverb. Bpt scholars have grappled for millennia with too much information, and in periods when information resources seemed to be growing es, pecially fast, they devised ingenious ways to control-lmd use the floods. The Renaissance, du;ing which numbers of available texts grew at an,imprecedented pace, was-th~ ~;~reat age of systematic note 'takirig. Manuals taught students how to condense the contents of all of literature, ancient and

\

modern, in abstracts and extracts organized by headings. Jeremias Drexel, a seventeenth-century Jesuit who wrote one of the standard treatments, showed how much this art was valued by the title he chose for it, "Goldmine." His frontispiece was even more eloquent-it juxtaposed a group of miners digging for gold in the ground with a single scholar taking notes on the truer gold in his books.' Scholars well grounded in this regime, like Isaac Casaubon, spun tough, efficient webs of notes around the margins of their books and in their notebooks-hundreds of Casaubon's annotated books and almost sixty of his copybooks survive-and used them to retrieve information about everything from the religion of Greek tragedy to the history of Egyptian culture in late antiquity. 10 Then, as now, attractive and costly new technologies took shape. Jacques Cujas, a prominent sixteenth-century legal scholar, amazed visitors to his study when he showed them the rotating barber's chair and moveable book stand that enabled him to keep ~any open books in view at the same time, moving himself or the text as the occasion required. Thomas Harrison, a seventeenth-century English, inventor who seems to have sprung from the pages of a novel by J. G. Farrell, e;;;ii>ed an information eabinet that he called the "Ark of Studies." A squad or readers, he explained, could summarize and excerpt the vast number ofbooks being published, and arrange their notes by subject on labeled metal hooks, somewhat in the manner of a twentiethcentury card index. The great German philosopher Leibniz-perhaps the last , man who was simultaneously at the cutting edges of history, philosophy, and natural science--enthusiastically obtained one of Harrison's cabinets and used it in his research.U For less erudite so'uls, simpler techniques abridged the process of looking for information, much as Wikipedia and Google do now. Erasmus said-and believed-that every serious student must read the entire corpus of the classics and make his own notes on them. But he also composed a magoificent reference work, the Adages, i1) whlch he laid out and -explicated thousands of pithy ancient sayings-and provided neat subject indexes to help readers find what they needed. For centuries, thousands of schoolboys first encoun. . tered the wisdom of the ancients in this handy, predigested form: When Erasmus told the story of Pandora, he said that she did not open ajar-as in the original version ofthe story by the Greek poet Hesiod-but instead box. In every European language except Italian, as Erwin and DoraPanofsky showed

.

a

,.

:RISJS

The Book Dematerializes

297

!Xel, a

Ients, :;old"P of
!S 011

IS

like of ated to

long ago, "Pandora's box" became proverbial, as playwrights, poets, and essayists rriade Erasmus's collection their first port of call for a neat way to express the dangers of thoughtless action, not to mention their fear of women. 12 Like Al Gore's invention of the Internet, Pandora's box is a canard-one made ubiquitons, almost universal, by the power of a new information technology. Even the best search procedures, in other words, depend on the databases they explore, and sometimes yield factoids, rather than facts. From the eighteenth century onward, a new pattern gradually established itself. States, universities, and academies maintained great research libraries, more or less available to the public. At their most ambitious, they offered readers books. and manuscripts in encyclopedic abundance. In\perial libraries collected information on a worldwide scale, vividly symbolized by the enormous domes that covered their central reading rooms. Their staffs also pioneered in information retrieval. They nofonly organized the books on the shelves but also devised mnltiple indexes to help readers find the information they needed-including such longtime stat:i~ as the printed catalogues of the British Library and the Library ofCongress. The nineteenth and twentieth centuries also witnessed a vast democratization of general reading-a story be~utifnlly told in part by Jonathan Rose.l' Cheap collections like Everyman's Library and the Haldeman-Jnlius Little Blue Books brought solid .books other than the· Bible and the Book of Martyrs into working-class households. Public libraries offered little islands of 11,eace and print among the sprawling, clpotic tenement blocks of the industrial cities. The old regimes of note talcing became less important, as the dictionaries, thesauruses, encyclopedias, and collections of quotations that had been developing since the eighteenth century became more and more a part of everyday bourgeois life. The title used ~or one popnlar form of reference work in Germany and Russia, "Conv~ation Lexicon," gives.a sense of what books like this could do for readers who, like so many Chekhov characters, wanted,to converse all_ day on every subject under the sun. Yet no collection, no work of reference could offer all the books or information relevant to a complex subject, In the 1940s, Fremont Rider, a practitioner of Extreme Librarianship at Wesleyan, prophesied .that titl~s were multiplying so quickly that they would soon overflow even the biggest sep; of stacks. He and his iofluential acolyteVerner Clapp argued that microphotography could elim" inate this problem. Just photograph the books, store the images on cards, and

298

CODEX IN CRISIS

toss the dusty, decaying originals. The card catalogue in its drawers would become the actual research library, which could survive and grow forever. Readers would be able to find anything they wanted, in a dean, accessibk form, while librarians could stop building and maintaining expensive open stacks. 14 Projects multiplied. Some of them-like Eugene Power's Short Title Catalogue project, which distributed 26,000 early English books on microfilm-genuinely changed tbe working lives of scholars and students. Meanwhile, otber companies offered texts on microfiche, or simply reprinted books tbat had become rare or fragile on modem, acid-free paper. From the 1950s on, libraries began to resound witb the deep voices of salesmen who claimed tbat tbey could provide vast runs of material immune to decay. The results were genuinely dramatic. As old universities expanded and new ones sprouted in tbe 1950s and 1960s, generous funding enabled tbem to buy what was available on film or microfiche and in reprint form and tbus to cre· ate effective collections in ten or fifteen years--sometimes from a standing start. Many ambitious lil{~s devised and carried out tbeir own schemes as well. Suddenly, you coul<! conduct serious research on tbe Vatican Library's collections not only in Rome but also in St. Louis, where tbe Knights of Columbus assembled a vast corpns of thicrofilms; or study tbe Milanese Bib· lioteca Ambrosiana at Notre Dame. For tbe first time, you could become an expert bibliographer or paleographer, edittexts or excerpt ancient newspapers and journals, without ever leaving home in California or Kansas. (Scholars, of course, did tbeir best to conce'!l tbese facts from tbe deans who funded their research travel.) But tbe film- and reprint-based libraries of tbe 1950s and 1960s never became really comprehensive. The commercial companies tbat did tbe filming naturally concentrated on marketable materials. Nonprofit sponsors concentrated on tbe texts that mattered to:tb6m---Catb~lic institutions, for example, on medieval Latin manuscripts. No· dear logic determined which texts were reprinted on paper, which were .filmed, and which remained in obscurity. It all cost a great deal more tban anyone had envisioned at first. Some projects--' especially tbose tbat used microfiches-<:ncoU!J.tered sales resistance, and a number of tbe early efforts died or became dormant; Onee-prosperous reprint publishers ended up, like Bussi and his associates, drowning in unsold books. Worst of all, some of tbelarges(~ best-funded projects---especiallytbe great newspaper-filming enterprises whose history Nicholson Baker has brought to

j

CODEX IN CRISIS

The Book Dematerializes

299

its drawers would and grow forever. a dean, accessible tg expensive open ne Power's Short \nglish books on trs and students. simply reprinted paper. From the of salesmen who etodecay. ·anded and new ed them to buy nd thus to ereom a standing wn schemes as tican Library's 1e Knights of \1ilanese Bibd become an t newspapers (Scholars, of funded their Is never bethe filming 1rs concen~ rexample,

light-had tragic consequences. Thousands of original documents of great beauty and interest were physically destroyed while their contents were recorded on film. Library users who had once been able to savor the artistry of Wrnsor McCay's "Little Nemo in Slumberland" in the colorful pages of the New York Herald found themselves squinting at black-and-white images on blurry screens. In this new, Darwinian ecology, the photographic revolution dwindled-physically, in most libraries--from a sweeping project to change the way everyone read and worked to a single room where graduate students, fuculty, and unusually diligent undergraduates pored over texts that they were willing to read even in an unappealing, black-and-white form. Rider's promise of a world of information on neatly filed cards yielded thousands of reels of film that must be cranked and maneuvered to be read. It is a lesson to remember as we move through a new age-of rapid change and great promises."
{)

Google's Empire The current era of digitalization unquestionably outstrips that of microfilm, in ambition and in achievement. Few individuals ev~r owned microfilm or microfiche readers, after all, whereas most serious readers in developed countries now have direct access to personal computers or laptops and an Internet connection. The changes wrought by all this are obviotis. Even the most traditionally minded of scholars, faced with· the need to look up a date, a fuct, or a text, gen~rally begins not by going to a library reference room crammed with encyclopedias and handbooks, but by consulting a s~arch engine. "Conservatively," a cheerful editor from Cambridge University Press told me, "95 percent of all scholarly inquiries start at Google." And that'makes ;ense: Google, the nerdiest of corporations, has roots in the world of bpoks. Ascoiding to oral tradition, Google's founders started out with a plan to create an electronic database of the books at Stanford and turned to ~.Web only because it "offered, .at that time, a smaller sample size. Google's fumoussearch algorithm, moreover, emulates the principle of schol.atly citation. By counting up ancfevalu.ating earlier linlcs, Google steers users. to the sources that oihers have already found helpful. In a sense, the hypermodern search engine reselflbles nothing more tlian a teeming mass of old-fashioned footnotes. just as footnotes tell you where an author went to dig up his or her facts and quotations, so Google tells you where most people have gone before you in order to learn what you want to know.

300

CODEX IN CRISIS

For the last few years, Google and its competitors have heen at work on staggeringly ambitious projects, designed to transform the way in which all readers go about finding books. Even the scale of this enterprise is hard to fathom. A conservative estimate of the number of books published throughout history is 32 million: currently, though, Google believes that that there could be as many as 100 million. The company collaborates with publishersthere are currently some 10,000 of these so-called Google partners around the world-to provide information about books currently in print, including text samples, to all users of the Web. So do a number of rival companies. As Google, Amazon, and Barnes & Noble compete, the Web has become a vast and vivid online bookstore. Anyone with a laptop can scan dust jackets, read blurbs, and peek between the covers of the limited group ofbooks that can still be bought. Cambridge University Press, which became a partner in 2004, receives 500"000 page views a inonth from searchers who began at Google or Googi.(£o~ks. In other words, around two-thirds of all the potential customers for the books of the world's oldest publisher start at Go ogle rather than the press's own Web site. A second, even larger enterprise-the Google Library Project-has brought the company into collaboration with great libraries around the world. Drawing on the vast collections. of Stanford, Harvard, Michigan, the New York Public Library, and many others, Google is digitizing as many out-of-print books as possible. It is an extraordinary effort that Google itself describes as designed to "build a comprehensive index of all the books in the world." This index, moreover, will enable readers to sear.ch all the books it contains and to see full texts of all those n9t covered, by copyright. Google's book project is a twenty-firstcentury version ofFremont.R{der's pl.in, on steroids and in your face: a list of books that will ultimately be universal in scope, accessible everywhere, and accompanied by full texts. It is hard to exaggerate how much mate.rial is becoming accessible month by month and what will become ~!'cessible in the next few years, for those wh.; study the distant past or the Third World as well as those primarily concerned.with the presen.t. ·Google is flanked by other big efforts. Some are largely philanthropic, like·the old standby Projeet Gutenberg, which provides hand-keyboarded texts of English andAmencan classics, plain in appearance and easy to use, and the distinctive Million~ Book Project, founded by Raj Reddy at Carnegie Mellon University. Reddy works with partners around the

EX IN CRISIS

The Book Dematerializes

SOl

'nat work on y in which all ise is hard to ;hed throughhat that there 1 publishersTS around the ncluding text >mpanies. As ecome a vast jackets, read : that can still · in 2004, rei! Google or >tential cus' rather than has brought ld. Drawing · ~ork Public ntbooks as designed to tdex,moreee full texts 'lenty-firstLce: a list of :re, andacble month ; for those tarilyconSome are
~provides

!>pearance Fd by Raj toundthe

world to provide, among other things, online texts in many languagM for which character-recognition software is not yet available. Add in the hundreds of smaller efforts in specialized fields. Perseus, for ex· ample, an incredibly useful site based at Tufts, began with Greek and Latin texts and now embraces works from the English Renaissance. Readers can make direct online use of dictionaries, grammars, and commentaries as they struggle through the originals. There are also new commercial enterprises like Alexander Street, which offers libraries beautifully produced electronic collections of everything from "Harper's Weekly" to the letters and diaries of American immigrants. Even the biggest libraries are expanding faster and more vertiginously than Borges conld have dreamt, thanks to the electronic resources listed, at length, on their Web pages. It has already become impossible for ordin'9".J!..-~cholars to keep abreast of the basic sources onlinethough D-Lib Magazine, an online publication, helps by highlighting library Web pages that do an especially good job of organizing digital sources and collections, rather as material libraries used to advertise their acquisition of a writer's papers or a collection of hooks with fine bindings. Many librarians view these developme~ts with warm approval. Kristian Jensen is a ,dapper, hyperarticnlate curator of early printed books at the British Library, who worke_d with Microsoft. on a project, now abandoned, to digitize the library's immense holdings in nineteenth-century literature. His tlsual style is extremely .precise and sober,. but when he talks about the prospects of digital libraries, he lights up. "You can't help being enthusiastic," he says, at the thought of all this ";natenal becoming available to teachers and students at universiti~s and,·s.chools all over the world. One way to see what he means is to visit the Web site of the Online Computer Library Center and look at their WorldMap. This imaginative application plots numbers of books in public and academic systems around the world, country by country. Ask tlie WorldMap to show you. how many public library books the world's nations boast: you will· /;ee the. relati~n of the Northern to the Southern Hemisphere, and of Western natiqns to their former colonies, all laid out in stark color. Sixty million Bdto;ms have 1!6 million public library books at their disposal, w:hile the more tlfan l.l billion Indians have 36 million." . World poverty, in other words, is embodied in lack of print as well as lack of food-it means that citizens of many natio~s do not have access. to their own literatore and .history, much less to information about other countries.

j

302

CODEX IN CRISIN

The Internet, as constituted in its short past, has not yet done much to r~, dress this imbalance. In 2005, when I sat in a tin-roofed, incandescently hut West African Internet cafe and tried to answer questions from my students In America, I could find little high-end material on the screen, and neither, by the look of things, could my Beninese fellow users. By now it would be possi· ble to find far more, and better, digital resources, even on a slow PC in Naititingou. As the capillary spread of electrification reaches smaller and smaller cities, as Internet cafes sprout in small Asian, Mrican, and Latin American towns, and as Goog!e and its rivals fill the Web with solid texts, the .. 11\ap of knowledge will undergo a metamorphosis. Capitalism, of all things, is \) democratizing access to books at an unprecedented pace. · Kazin loved the New York Public Library because it admitted everyone. His fellow readers included not only neat young scholars like Hofstadter, but also wild figures from Weegee's photographs of the New York night: "the little man with one slice of hair across his bald head, like General MacArthur's ... poring with a faint smile over a large six-column Bible in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, En· glish, French, German," and "the bony, uply, screeching ntadwoman who reminded me of Maxim Gorky's 'Boless,' the anguished old maid who had a professional scribe take down passionate letters to a lover and then asked the , scribe to make up letters from the lover to her." 17 Even Kazin's democratic imagination could ngt have envisaged the Web's new world of informatign and its hordes of actual and pote1>tial users. The Internet cannot feed millions of people or protect them from AIDS or .flooding. But it could feed an unlimited nUIIlber ofhungry minds with~Pame~ Gandhi, Voltaire, and Wollstonecraftas well as the classics of ~ther cuiiuies, and the manuals of sciences and trades, in dozens of languages. The consequences may be seismic,. bigger and louder and deeper than we can hope to predict. Some. powerful figures in the realm of books, as we have seen, fear that thes~ projects will simply reinforce the world hegemony of English. Google did begin relatl'(<'ly ~lose to home, working with Eri'glish-language publishers and British and American collections; But the great American and British libraries·that first Nrtnered with Google are stuffed with books in all the languages of the world. Pal)! Leclerc, director of the New York Public Library {NYPL) and an enthusiastic original partner in the Google Books Project, notes that just under half of the millions of books in NYPL are in languages other than English, many of them in Asian, Slavic, and African. Richard

SIS

The Book Dematerializes

303

retot in by oiin .d
n

e

s

Ovenden, who works with Google at the Bodleian Library in Oxford, points out that the millions of books that will be digitized there are in some forty languages. Meanwhile, libraries on the Continent and elsewhere are signing Google partnership agreements of their own. The mass of old and new texts on the Web will not be an English-only zone. The Internet's technologies, moreover, are continually developing, and many of the changes make it easier for a user to take a stand in the flood of information and fish out exactly the right book or article from the foam. Consider the search function: the hunting-gathering-connecting of information that Go6gle ot Yahoo or Ask does on our behalf. In its first age, a search engine used,,a--~crawler"-actually a stationery entity-to look for relevant pages on a stored, and slighdy out-of-date, version of the Web. No two search engines gave exactly the same results, though Google regularly found more and more !-'sefulsites than its rivals, and this accomplishment won it placement as the sole engine of choice on many official Web pages. Even Google's crawler, though, remained as fixated on surfaces as a fashion photographer. It informed the user ouly about the Spercent or so of content prominendy labeled as ~uch on,the top layers of Web pages. To find materials buried in such deep bodies of fact and do7mnentas the Library of Congress's Web site or JSTOR (the vast repository of scholarly journal articles), you had to carry out gynamic, focused searches: by going to the site and asking a specific question, or hiring a specialist firm like Bright Planet to ask it thousands of times foryou. ~ In recent years, however, as-anyone who regularly uses Go ogle knows, the crawlers have become more-adept at asking questions, and the search companies haveapparendy induced the big proprietary sites to become more responsive to the crawlers' inquiries. Specialist engines like Google Scholar can discriminate with astonishing precision- between relevant and irrelevant, firsthand and <;Ierivative information.- Internet tools offer not just more information every day but also more effective ways of formulating precise iflquiries. One of my favorites is Amazon's list of "statistically improbable phrases," or SIPs, in.any given book.- Click on one of them and Amazon whisks you offto a list of other books in which the same highly unusual combination of words appears--a fast and_ simple y.tY to find connections that previous buyers have not already made. Your local reference librarian still knows a lot more tricks than you do for finding information, in books or on

304

CODEX IN CRISIS

·I ' j,I

" 'I·

1.1 · ·I

II I

II '

!I
'

!I ,

I II,

il111
, r·
1:

il! ,I

the Web. But the powers of search keep growing, and it is hard to imagine what they will be in ten or twenty years. For all its virtues, the Google Library Project, in its present, working form, has received mixed reviews, and that is understandable. Google shows the reader a scanned version of the page. These are generally accurate and readable-though individual pages can be blurry or obscured, and scanner operators occasionally miss pages or scan them out of order. Sometimes the copy used is imperfect. In the spirit of the movie Office Space, at least one scholarly acquaintance has spotted a body part, scanned with the text. Other problems are more serious. Google uses optical character recognition to prodJice a second version, for use by its search engine, and this process has some quirkS. In a scriptorium lit by the sun, a scribe could mistakeuly transcribe a "u" as an "n," or vice versa. Curiously, the computer makes the same mistakes. If you enter "qualitas"-an important term in medieval philosophyin Google Book Search, you will find ahuost 2,000 appearances. But if you enter "qnalitas," a nonword, you will be rewarded with more than 600 references to ''qualitas" that you would not have found using the correct term. That is a lot of "qnalitas." If you want to get a sense of the full magnitude of the problem, call up the Google version ofa German book printed in the old spiky Jrpe, Fraktur, and ask to "view plain text"-the text used for search. In many cases, the system will show you page after page of gobbledygook. It seems sigfor both science and scholarship, "WISnificant that the Germarr word ·. .senschaft," often appears as' "Wrlferischaft" in these random text zones. It is hard to see how errors on this scale will ever be eliminated-any more than the thousands of errors made when the catalogues of the great university and public libraries were converted into databases will ever be corrected as a whole. Serious pro\>lems also affect the "metadata," or data about data, that · Google offers its users. The cataloguing information that identifies any given hem is often incomplete or confusing. Multivolmne works can be very hard to use, since Go ogle originally treated them as single items (this policy seems to have changed, perhaps in response to users' complaints: the hive mind at work). And the key terms that Google provides in order to characterize indi- . vidual books are sometimes unintentionally comic. It is not all that helpful, when you are thinking about how to use an old Baedeker guide to Paris, to be told randomly that one of its central concepts is "fauteuil." The possibilities for glitches, and the pretexts for grmnbling, are endless. Scholars, whose ·
~
"·

(..-

sr.s

Book Dematerializes

305

me

ng
NS

ld

er ·e
e
r

interests are minutely precise and philological, inclined by disposition and experience to look on the dark side, often concentrate on these blemishes. HI It is true that, thanks to Google and its rivals, social and cultural historians work on the period from the mid-eighteenth to the early twentieth century already occupy a massive and growing intellectual sweet spot. Without ever leaving home, they can search for evidence about everything from political language to the rise of new technologies, in a database much larger than any historian has ever used before. Where details about editions matter less than sheer quantity of easijy accessible, generally reliable informationor where only a single, ninete~nth-century edition exists-digitization has already brought about a revolut(on. It is an amazing experience to teach liter, ary texts that you know well, but not pe~fectly, with the Google Books text up and searchable on your laptop. And it is more than transformative to sit in · your office at a small liberal arts or community college and call up, as you already can, thousands of books in dozens of languages, the nearest material copy of which is hundreds of miles away. Still, even the sweet spot has its sour patches. Though Google claims to make full texts available for all books not protected by copyright, in fact you "' cannot download or even read in full many of the out-of-copyright texts. The system allows you to see only the same three wavy li~ banners of text (pretty mum guaranteed na't t,<> CO,lltain the exact passage Y?U need) that it offers for books in copyright. Li\<e Erasmus,. Go ogle is bot'ri" generous and a fallible guide to the universe of books·', / An analogy may help to highlight Google's accomplishments and limitations. In the 1910s and 1920s1 Aichibald.CaryCo6lidge supervised the con' struction and organization .of Harvard University's Widener Library, the world's greatest collection of sqolarly books. Like the creators of Google, he worked on a grand scale, deliberately building collections not only of rare and famous works but ;$o o('Writfugs which are neither great nor fashionable," since these were essential for "background and filling in." Like them, too, he emphasized the need to make books as accessible as possible, both by creating a library large .enough to hold millions of them and by cataloguing them as rapidly as possible. Bnt Coolidge, as William Bentinck- · Smith recorded, "led a life of books. He was seldom without them. In his younger days he traveled aqoss Asia with a little trunkload of them," and in later years he read as he walked in the country." Accordingly, when Coolidge
~

306

CODEX IN CRISIS

set out to create a universal library, he did not simply start buying books by the ton. Instead, he searched the world for integral collections that would add new fields to Widener's holdings, systematically building resources for both present and future research. His directing intelligence, and those of the helpers and donors he inspired, played a vital role in making the Widener a uniquely efficient machine for scholarly work; its catalogues were as accurate as its holdings were comprehensive. The Google Library project aims to be genuinely universal, as no material library can, even the Widener. But it lacks the governing vision of a Coolidge, and accordingly operates less as a vast, coherent ordqing mechanism than as a gigantic fire hose dousing the world's readers with texts untouched by human hands or minds. Google could do much more for the world's readers if it invited Coolidge's modern counterparts-masters of both the virtual world of information and the sensuous, material world of real books--to plan and shape its virtual library. At present, th~ugh, no evidence suggests that Google sees the future of its enterprise in these terms. . In the end, moreover, general conditions set limits to what the Google project, along with its competitors, can acli.ieve, at least in the near term. The miCrofilm years showed that reproduction projects on a large scale are realized when undertaken by national inStl1::fitions determined to preserve a patrimony and malre it availal;>le; or by coJhpanies out to malre money. So far, the new Web companies have·moved'm~ faster, and uiJ.like the Bibliotheque Nationale, they have plumped fi>r making vast quantities of books available for other~ to sort and use, rather than for digitizing preselected, well known texts; But even Google's sleei.<, high-powered engines cannot pull books onto the Web any faster than the pots of money that fuel them will allow. In the end, Google will digitjze only as much as the relevant income stream allows-a point imderlined by Microsoft's recent decision to leave this field to Google. Th~t means that they are going to leave vast numbers of important books untouched. At every turn, technical and economiC problems confront Google and its rivals and limit their freedom of action. One of the most frequently discussed difficulties i.sthat of copyright. Google estimates, very roughly, that'between 5 and 10 percent of known books are currently in print. Twenty percent more-those produced between the beginning of print in the fifteenth century and 1923-are otit of copyright The remainder-perhaps 75 percent of

!

I

I

ISIS

The Book Dematerializes

307

; by !dd
~th

:he ;a .te

all books ever printed-are "orphans," still covered by the very long copyright protections currently in force in Europe and North America, but out of print and pretty much out of mind. Rather as the Alexandrian library confiscated scrolls fr6m ships, Google simply scans as many of these as it can, though it lacks legal permission to do so. But this part of the firm's project remains highly controversial. A number of the publishers who use Google to market their new books have sued to prevent Google from scanning books in copyright without o]>taining formal permission-a daunting prospect. For the moment, accordingly, Google is not making these works fully available, and a recent legal settlement only makes it possible to show larger portions of such books to Google users. Then, too, Google has no im,mediate plans to scan books from the first couple of centuries of printing. When asked why, computer people sometimes explain that the books' fragile condition makes them hard to scan. That is ridiculous: most early books are far less fragile, thanks to the fine rag paper on which they were printed and the glorious craft skills-of their makers, than the nineteenth-cen~ novels-'mass<produc<;d on wood pulp paper and now dried out and brittle-that Goilgie's scanners are capturing by the hundreds. The real reason is commercial ..Rare boo~eq!lire expensive special conditions for copying, and most of those likely to glmerate a lot of use have /, already been made available by companies like Chad\vyck-Healey and Gale. These descendants of the microtilm houses sell massive collections to libraries and universities, for substantial ·fees. Early English Books Online (EEBO) offers 100,000 titles printed between 1475 and 1700, 25,000 of them searchable. Ei~teenth Century'Collections Online provides searchable full texts of around 150,000 books-33 million pages' worth. Massive tomes in Latin and the little pamphle;ts that poured <)ff the presses during the Puritan revolution, schoolbooks, Jaoobean tragedies with prompters' notes, and political pamphlets by wild-eyed Diggers are all available in their original form to any main library user in New York or London, Syracuse or Sydney. Google will not directly explore this territory. Other vast and viial sectors of·the world;s book production are neither catalogued nor accessible on site, much less available for digitization. Materials from the poorest societies exert little attraction on companies that rely on subscriptions or advertising: Countries where even big city merchants do not . take credit cards will not provide online advertisers with orders, or Google
· '>.., ·

-

308

CODEX IN CRISIS

with cash flow. One possible outcome of the current race to digitize, then, is a new version of the existing imbalances between north and south, former metropoles and former colonies. The book-deprived inhabitants of subSaharan Africa aud much of India may be able to read Western works of every kind on screen. It is far less certain that they will be able to find and read texts in their own languages. Whatever happens on screen, the great libraries of the Northern Hemisphere will remain irreplaceable for a long time. One of the best things com' puterization will do for everyone is simply to pinpoint the location of the books people need. Astonishingly, for all the hundreds of millions of books in American college ·and university libraries, there are normally no more than five copies of any given book in a language other than English. Google has always described itself as a company that shows users the way to find the information they need, not as the primary provider of that information. In the carefully chosen words of Jim Gerber, director of Content Partnerships, "We · want to make sure readers can find books." The company does this job very well-and we would be·foolish to expect its managers to take on further tasks for no extra compensation. · A record of all history"appears \"'en more distant. In theory, repositories fall into two categories. Librades; hpuse books and literary manuscripts, while archives preserve documents-;Ahe Vast range of papers, seals, and other materials that the world's lawyers,\n~taries, and government officials, shops, and corporations create in the co~ of their work. In practice, the two categodes blur, andalways have. All great libraries contain lots of documents. Most archives haye working libraries; some of them very large and valuable. The point to keep in mind'is that if you plan to make the whole record of human experience avagable, as the ;,ost utopian champions of digitization imagine, you have to render both kinds of collection accessible online. It is true that millions of documents have a!teadyappeared on-screen.The online records of the Patent and Thademark Office are a wonderland for anyone interested in exploring the brilliance an!i luriacy of American tinkerers. Thanks to the nonprofit Aluka archive, scholars and writers in Africa can study on the Web a growing number of African records, whose odginals are stored, inaccessibly, elsewhere in the world; Historians of the pap_acy can read odginal documents withmitgoing to Rome, in a digitized collection mounted by the Vatican Secr_et Archive. And the Library "of Congress has taken the lead

if',

The Book Dematerializes

309

, r·.
ICI

"
ol

ld
IJ

.1

1<'
{S

.II

1-

·.e

at everything from digitizing the papers of major thinkers like Hannah Arendt to collecting sound and video materials systematically and making them available as well. Its Web site is already a magnificent archive open to the world. Meanwhile, individual curiosity and passion have driven the creation of virtual archives on every imaginable subject, often unconnected with any material collection. The Web can transport you to documents on sages from Thomas and Jane Welch Carlyle to Edward Said, to vast runs of reproduced political poems and cartoons, and even into the recondite field that I cultivate: the Latin writing of the Renaissance (try the Web sites "White Trash . Scriptorium" and "Philological Museum"; both are indispensable). 20 . But even the biggest of these projects is nothing more than a flare of light . in the vast and -.still unexplore\1 night sky of humanity's documented past. The Archive of the Indies in Simancas, a magnificent product of the Spanish · monarchy's obsession with record keeping, possesses an estimated 86 million pages' worth of documents. With the help of IBM, it has now .digitized more than 10 million of these. Scholars and students who go to Simancas can do much of their work on screen, saving the originals and their eyesight at one and the same time. But they cannot search or aocess these pages from abroad. ArchivesUSA, a Web-based kuide to Americ'an archives, lists S,SOO·repositories and more than'160,000 collections of primary source material. The Na-' . tional Archives alone contain sonfe'fl.ine billion ·items. It is not likely that we will see the whole archives of tho/ United States online in the immediate _) rV" futnre-much less those of poo;<:r nations. The supposed nniversallibnrry,then, and its companion universal archive, will not be a seamless mass ofbooks, easily linked and studied together, but a patchwork ot different interfaces and databases, some open to anyone with a computer arid WiFi, others closed to those who lack access or money. The real challenge.now is how to chart the tectonic plates of infm;mation that are crashing irito .one another and then to learn to navigate the new landscapes they are creating. Blaise Agnera y Areas, until recently an architect at Microsoft Live Labs and a pioneer in computer-assisted bibliography (full disclosure: he took courses with me years _ago at Princeton), suggests that the best way to think about the masses of material that are being gathered on the Web is to divide them in two. One of them is a library and cultural archive of the present. Go ogle and its competitors have already gathered collections far more massive than anything

.

the world has known-collections of the books published and the music, art, and film produced after 1990 or so. Though these companies would all disclaim any ambition to serve as the world's repositories, that is what they have pecome. Each of them holds a sea of data, of books that have been captured and made searchable, of images and tunes-all of it washing around
in multiple, redundant servers, constantly moving, continually refreshed. Over time, as more of this material emerges from protection and becomes

accessible-and it will-we will be able to learn things about our culture, in the present, which we could never have known in the past. We will still be able to read books and scrutinize images as we always have, but we will also be able to interrogate this whole mass of material in new ways, using the same applied mathematical techniques that the National Security Agency uses to mine data from our telephone calls and e-mails. Soon the present will become overwhelmingly accessible. It is a thrilling prospect, but it has some scary implications. Readers and lovers of music and the arts already attend more to the present than the past. And the second great wodge of material-the great messy assemblage of sources for earlier periods, some complete but many partial, some open to all and others for profit, that is now taking shape-will not, in the foreseeable future, coalesce into a single, accessible database. Nj'ither Google nor anyone else will fuse the proprietary collectipns of early books and the local systems created by in~ dividtlal archives into a .single accessible mass of information. Though the distant past will also be more accessible than ever before, in a technical sense, once it is capfured artll.preserved as a vast, disjointed mosaic, it may actually recede ever more rapidly from our collective attention. We will still need our material libraries and archives. In some ways, we have come to understand better than ever before in the last twenty years or so just what makes old-fashioned, bricks-and mortar collections essential and distinctive. Historians, literary scholars, and librarians have realized, in the words ofJohn Seely Brown and Paul Duguid, that information leads a "social · . life" of its OWn. The form in which you eneounter a text can have a huge im" pact on how you use it. Take the simplest case: If you want to make people pelieve that a given official document-say, a letter from the commanding officer of a young Texan in the Air National Guard-is genuiri.e, you cannot just give people its wording.You have to show that it is on the right sort of pap~r, entered in the standard form, and type<! on the proper Selectric. The

only way to know that for certain is to see the original and compare it to others, and in most cases, you can do that only in an archive where they are reliably stored. As scanning technology improves, watermarks and other vital signs are becoming more accessible to remote users. But scholarly or even forensic exactitude still requires direct consultation of original documents. Original documents and books reward us for taking the trouble to find them by telling us things no im3.ge can. Duguid describes watching a fellow historian systematically sniff 250-year-old letters in an archive. By detecting the smell of vinegar-which had been sprinkled on letters from towns struck by cholera in the eighteenth century, in the hope of disinfecting them-he could trace the history of disease outbreaks. 21 Historians of the book, a new and growing tribe, /ead books as scouts read trails. Bindings-custom made, for the most part, in the early centuries of printing-can tell you who owned them and what level of society they belonged to. Marginal annotationswhich abounded in the centuries when readers habitually went through books pen in hand-identify the often surprising messages that individuals have found as they read. Many original writers and thinkers-Martin Luther, Hester Thrale Piozzi, John Adams, and Samuel Taylor Coleridge-filled their books with notes that are indispensable to understanding their thought. Thousands of forgotten men and women covered Bibles and prayer books, recipe collections'and political pamphlets with pointing hands, underlining, and notes that give deep insight into what their books meant to them-and how they cooked their meals, treated their illnesSes, and said their prayers. 1... ., · ' Ifyou wantto cap~ how a giveli )>ook was packaged and what it has meant to the readers who have~wrapped it, as many scholars now do, you have to ' look notjust at all the editions'h~t also at all the copies you can find, from original manuscripts to cheap reprints. The databases include multiple copies of some titles, l>ut they will never provide all the copies of, say, Adam Smith's _The Wi!alth Nations and the early responses it provoked. Sometimes, too, the processes that hav: turned material books into electronic texts have stripped them of the rich_ evidence that their original form could provtde. The texts available on EEBO; for example, were not scanned from the originals, but from microfilms. Their bindings are not reproduqd, and it is hard to be sure of their original sizes---:.two densely material sets of dues thatscholars constantly use, when working out who read, or was expected to read, a given book. "[o hear books speak, you have to interview them in their original habitat.

of

?

312

it
!

::

F
'Iii.

As companies compete for pole position, market share, and what the neers of the Dot Bomb laughingly called "first mover advantage," they are vising new projects with all the imaginative verve of Fremont Rider. Some these call to mind the effort of the 1960s and 1970s to put everything on crofilm, which did a lot of harm as well as a great deal of good, because ' creators and managers ignored the social life of information. Up to scanning has not caused a second Great Destruction ofn<1-vSI>ap·en:-thcmgh it has resulted in the disposal of a lot of older books and journals. But people who are now banging at library doors seem likely to malce some of the . same mistalces as the microfilm mavens of the 1950s and 1960s. On the other hand, some librarians, like those at Emory University, are beginning to away would-be suitors whose business plans do not properly justify why a collection should surrender its intellectual property to a company-even as , those at other institutions, like the Princeton Theological Seminary, say yes.

I

II !,I,,
11

;II

Publishing without Paper? I! is not just the conditions of research ihat are changing, but the whole traditional system of writing and publishing-though here, too, the situation is not \ easy to"~ead Books, ma~es, daily n"""spapers, and scholarly journals con\tinue to appear. R. R. Bowker, a company baS<d in New Providence, N""" Jersey, ' ~- ·-~ compiles what was once a book and is now a database, Books in Print. According to Bowker, "publishers in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Aus· tralia and New Zealand released 375,000 n""" titles and editions in 2004 ... In, . eluding imported editions available in multiple markets, the total number of new English language books available for sale in the English-speaking world in 2004 was a staggering 450;000."22 Go to any branch of Borders or Barnes & Noble or their British counterparts,_Jllaclcwell's and Waterstone's, and torrents of , brightly jaclceted n""" books on every subject confront you-not to mention · staclcs of penodicals. This tidal wave of n""" print, in fact, poses librarians one of their most serious current problems, In Prince,ton University's Firestone Library, the stacks are already full. The yearly budget cannot stretch to cover all the new books and jourpals that scholars demand~many of them priced in expensive pounds and euros .. .Electronic media, a n""" system for borrowing books rapidly from nearby lib~aries, and electronic delivery of articles all cost money that would

I I'
II

,: 'li

·fl. I

![' l[i , 'I I,

[I,

?

once have been spent on traditional media. Nonetheless, every year the library adds more than a mile of new printed materials to its collection. This mass of print enters the building dynamically, like a battering ram made of paper and buckram. It forces older materials-often rare and valuable-into storage and destroys the traditional order of the collections, which served scholars for generations as a spatially defined memory theater. Like the sorcerer's apprentice, administrators and professors have conjured up so many active young scholars writing theses, articles, and books that they threaten to overwhelm libraries, and the faithful guardians of the knowledge base with them. Journals pose even harder problems. In theory, scholarly and scientific periodicals offer the newest data and hypotheses-the very things that scholars need most urgently. But their subscription prices have risen starkly. Elsevier, said to be the world's-largest for-profit scientific publisher, claims to serve "a global scholarly community of 7,000 journal editors, 70,000 editorial board members, 300,000 reviewers, and 600,000 authors." It charges as much as $21,744 per year for one of its periodicals, Brain Research~more than any but the very richest libraries can possibly afford. And, of course, cataloguing, binding, and finding space for this pullulating mass of new print are formidably expensive. True, new databases offer direct access to thousands of articles. A..sc~olar in the humanities can rummage ~rough older articles in more than .§00 arts, humanities, and social sciences journals without ever leaving his or her aesk, thanks to JS~OR. Project Muse, a second nonprofit collaboration based at Johns Hopkins Unj~rsity Press, offers full-text access to cur' rent and' recent-ru;!i&s fr<;>.m alniost 400 leading journals. Many libraries \. .. have. solved their space problem""'though not their budgetary one""'by abandoning print subscriptions for electronic ones, which enable their faculty.a;id students to identify and read the articles they need more quicldy and easiljr than they could in the era -of print. But these databases are accessible only tl,i those who work at research institutions. Those who remain outside these zones of privilege-including many journalists and writer""'are sharply disadvantaged, and know it. ~ Revolutions, hisforians know, are often caused not by oppression and disaster, but by rising expectations. More and more, scholars and scientists ex. ' pect to find everything they need on the Web. Teachers report that even, advanced· students refuse to trek to th~ library: articles available only on paper go unread, even if they are classics. M&nwhile, political authorities complain,
/
~

I
'
;:

314

CODEX IN CRISIS

I
I

with justice, that for-profit journals guard the gates to the kingdom of scientific research paid for by public funds, and earn massive profits by doing so. Many argue that all scholarly and scientific journals--and all university presses-should provide free full-text access to their materials to all. In the case of medical research, Congress has mandated that all80,000 papers produced every year under the sponsorship of the National Institutes of Health be placed on an open federal database, PubMed, once a year has passed from the date of publication. The Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences has gone even further. It has decided that all members of the faculty should post all of their work on an open Harvard Web page. Editors who hope to publish the work of Harvard professors will simply have to accept that a version of the piece in question is already · availab!l'' to the whole world, or allow the professor to post a PDF file of the work as edited and typeset for their journal. I cannot speak for journals or editors in the sciences. But I do serve as one.offour editors of the Journal of the History of Ideas, now in its sixty-ninth year of operation. My colleagues and I receive around 200 articles a year for consideration. Two of us read each one, and 'those 'that we find original and scholarly are then submitted to further scrutiny by two specialists--Qr three, if the first two disagree. The referees' reports are almost always very substantive and often quite long and detailed. In many cases, they help us help authors, by suggesting exactly where and why ( ' they nee<\ to modify claims, examine further primary sources, or engage with ~-secqndary works. Once revision has taken place, our one full-time errlployee who manages the flow of files, copyedits the text, as does one of the four editors. Mistakes still, happen. William Shawn explained about the ·New Yofker, "Falling short ot'perl'e.5don is a process that just never stops."23 / But most of our authors--and most qf the readers who continue to subscribe to our journal or use it through libraries-seem to agree that we add substan" ·. dal value to the articles that we accept and publish. The four editors receive no compensation. Nor do the scores of referees who read articles at our request. But we pay all costs for the journal offices in · Philadelphia, since our host, the University of Pennsylvania, like niany other top research universities, refuses to invest any funds in the enterprise. We pay the,managerleditorwhokeeps the files moving, chai;es down referees and authors who miss theirdl!adlines, and copyedits the articles. We pay for a yearly .meeting of our full editorial hoard, the members of which serve as unpaid

y
t

tl
0

Y'
II II

P·
c<
Ui

si· le th ti< ar at: co th
W<

:As

zit

D'
sal

Id< Cc

tio wr for pu be

?

CODEX IN CRISIS

The Book Dematerializes

315

tes to the kingdom of sciennassive profits by doing so. 1urnals-and all university heir materials to all. In the . that all 80,000 papers pro·ational Institutes of Health mce a year has passed from one even further. It has deill of their work on an open he work of Harvard profespiece in question is already or to post a PDF file of the :ot speak for journals or ededitors of the Journal of the eration. My colleagues and n. Two of us read each one, then submitted to further o disagree. The referees' requite long and detailed. In ing exactly where and why iry sources, or engage with t1 place, our one full-time the text, as does one of the hawn explained about the
!SS

referees, advisers, and much more. And we pay the University of Pennsylvania Press, which composes, produces, and distributes the Journal, both on

paper and electronically. Slowly, the print version of the Journal has been losing subscribers, but for-pay use through )STOR and Project Muse has yielded more income each year--enough to compensate for the losses. And the entire structure that enables us to help authors produce the best work they can-the structure of refereeing and editing-depends on this stream of money. At $40-$32 for students, $110 for institutions-the price we ask for a
year's subsqiption to the Journal does not seem excessive to us, and the

that just never stops."2.3

who continue to subscribe agree that we add substan· do the scores of referees :s for the Journal offices in !Sylvania, like many.other ; in the enterprise. We pay · ses down referees and au-. tides. We payfor a yeatly . of which serve as uu.~"'"!

money all g\)es to the larger ends of scholarship. If we adopt an open-access model, allowing all readers to consnlt the entire journal without charge, or a partial one, allowing authors to publish their articles on the Web before we consider them: our income stream will certainly diminish. This conld leave us unable to accept or reject most articles within three months from submission, as we d6 now, or to copyedit the pieces we accept, or pay for handsome, legible page composition. "True, it might be possible to create a different system that wonld achieve the same ends. Journals disttibuted to the members of a professional association can use dues to cover the costs that subscriptions do not pay, and more ' more of them have adopted open-access policies. But we have no associand ation. lrhe .lniversity that serves as the journal's host conld cover our basic cost,s. BVmajor tesearch universities nowadays consistently refuse to take on this Iesponsibility: indeed, they do not seem to regard it as prestigious or $OJ:thwhile. Advertising revenue~ iue supporti:iJ.g the large-circulation magazifl~ as they move. more and ~ore of their offerings onto the Web: but Da)nuer-Benz and'Dior do not regarcl the readers of our journal as likely sales prospects. So far as the four of us who edit the Journal of the Hiitory of Ideas can see, open access for us will confirm the grim prophecies of Robert Conquest and Kingsley Amis: "More will mean worse." This little case suggests a few of the larger problems that the trans~orma tion of our media brings with it. The computer has made it possible to start wtiting very early-perhaps too early-in the course of research. Editors enc force a. system of peer review that prevents substandard work from being · published. and forces<11ll scholars, however gifted, to listen to informed advice before they give the world their work. The mass of direct publication on the

'

316

CODEX IN CRISIS

Web has created a fantastic new public sphere-and a fantastic new mass of ungainly, misspelled prose. Editors ask writers to take a second and a third look at what they have written-to clarify, polish, and correct. We form a thinlipped gray line, protecting both readers and authors from first thoughts. And this job is more important than ever, now that scholars inhabit an environment that enables them to write on the basis of what the sociologist Andrew Abbott calls "on-time" research-that is to say, snatch-and-grab raids into what is online, carried out in the course of composition-rather than the decks of neadywritten file cards that they would have compiled fifty years ago. 24 Harvard's sweeping solution to the problems faced by libraries and students may have good results in some fields. But in the humanities, satisfying the demand · that every article become immediately accessible on the Web for free will force us to abandon valuable forms and standards. In this new world, journals will become something like blogs with footnotes: unedited texts, glittering with · insights, but also bleutished with errors that no informed eye has picked up, and succeeded by angry, scatological discussion threads. The world of humanistic scholarship needs updating, but it does not need to be transformed ·into one more province of the public sphere that already exists, and serves ( quite different needs, on the Web. ~. 'some of the strongest advocates for digitization seem to welcome this out~pme--or at least the transformation of prose forms that it would bring about. Gregory Crane, the creator of Perseus, evokes a future in which scholars cast all their information not in the traditional forms of nonfictional writing-the article and the book-but 4t smaller, "granular" units that can be combined and rea;inbllied by Web users in an infinite number of ways. Kristian )ensen of the British Library agrees that this may come about. When you.writeJor the Web, he points ,out, you naturallytend·to cast your thoughts in little textual monads rather than in the traditional linear forms. Unlike Crane, though, Jensen is concerned about the result:Thdlow of texts onto the Web, Jensen worries, may be accompanied by--or even help to cause-a revolution in forms of attention that will harm, or even eliutinate, traditional forms of argument and writingc As the railroad threatened the cathedral, the intellectual snack pack threatens slow food. It is not yet clear that online publication will transform writiug as radically as Crane and Jensen suggest. Critics and true believers converge in emphasizing one feature of Web publication above all: its new form. The traditional
~

hot
IO

~I'<

hu

lc:

111

r<
S<

tl

c
il
t

'

d a fantastic new mass o( a second and a third lool< orrect. We furm a thinrom first thoughts. And rrs inhabit an environthe sociologist Andrew h-and-grab raids into -rather than the decks fifty years ago. 24 Hares and students may tisfying the demand 'b for free will force vorld, journals will tts, glittering with ye has picked up, ne world of hu' be transformed
rists, and serves

' welcome this it would bring t which schol. nonfictional nits that can ber of ways. bout. Wben lrthoughts ns. Unlike texts onto ·cause-a aditional dral, the ldically
~hasiz

I

itional

book and periodical place a single story, told by a master narrator, in the foreground. Even the most aggressive reader has to accommodate him or herself to the given form of the text. And even the most extensive and aggressive handwritten comments wind themselves around the monumental printed text like ivy growing up a pillar. Web sites, by contrast, place as much emphasis on images as on words and · make lateral movement easier than straightforward progress. Votaries urge the reader to give up the crutches of traditional plot and argument in favor of the self-plotted curves and swoops of this new form of reading. They emphasize that the protean text of the Web, which may change hour by hour as a political crisis unrolls or a hurricane is tracked, fits the conditions of modetn life, with its lack of stable beliefs and even of stable human selves. Similarly, they argue that Web sites-which can be dipped into freely fur one article or image, and which encourage back talk from their readers-fit the dispersed nature of modern life better than stable print media. Others note that this new form of reading is not only dynamic but also interactive. Writers can count the number of hits an article receives on a Web page; readers can use an author's name, laid out in hypertext, to send an e-mail response. Discussion strings make it possible for all involved to carry on elaborate debates about a provocative colu~ or review. At their most intense, these discus$ions metamorphosize into a n~'w kind of reading and writing community--all of whose members exert pr~sure on the choice and treatment of topi~, making the Web site itself in, yractive. Thus, Talking PointsJ-.feniq (TPM), a liberal political site. run by J~sh · Marsliall, employs several rep~t;ters, but also depends on local mformation sent in by readers around the co!rntry. During Hurricane Katrina, readers who worked for the federal governmertt, tracking climate and weather conditions, provided TPM with a level of precision and expertise in reporting that no newspaper or btoadcast news service could match. -'-Critics, by-contrast, heap obloquy on many features of these new textsfr~in the fact that some of them overemphasize design, ,while their words a~~ often transcribed from out-of-copyright sources or. compiled by out-ofwork "content providers," to the ubiquitous presence of bright marginal strips of advertising~. 'fltey insist that the prevalence of such fragmented, Ia; bile texts may compromise-even undermine-the print-bas_ed ability to grasp complex arguments and reason about them that seems critical to preserving a vital liberal democracy. And they argue that the growth ofmultiple

':\-·

I

\

\

318

CODEX IN CRISIS

':

tiny communities based on the Web will undermine the larger social community in which we all live. Votaries and critics alike exaggerate the novelty of the changes the Web has wrought. The new media of the decades around !900 transformed the presentation of texts just as radically as the Web has. Newspapers appeared regularly in multiple editions, rapidly bringing headline stories up to date. In Berlin, by the end of the nineteenth century, one of the major papers could be printed, packed, and on its way to distribution within eighteen minutes after news reached the central office. The existence of several editions each day meant that the newspaper <:ould follow a breaking story-like the hunt for an escaped murderer--stage by stage. Sometimes, of course, editors themselves promoted, or even created, stories of this kind. The Berliner Zeitung sent a reporter through the city, for example, while urging readers to try to catch him-an efferuve way to galvanize readers' interest and commitment, brilliandy evoked by Graham Greene in Brighton Rock. Kiosks, pillars, and cafes made each new edition available to readers. The city itself spoke, as Peter Fritzsche has shown, spewing an endless stream of stories and sense impressions over its inhabitants.25 Magazines, naturally, were not as protean as newspapers: their content was r fixed in each weeldy or monthly edition. But their massive advertising rev. · enue and longer leag.;time enabled them to experiment with even more varied ways of presenting text and advertisement. Editors self-consciously tried to make them into coherent works of art: not uninterrupted blocks of type, but artful combinations of word and image. William Dean Howells, describing'the creation of a fictional magazine, Every Other Week, in his 1890 novel A Hamrd of New Fortunes, showed the editor and owner realizing that they must hire an art director. He, in turn, commissioned what Howells calls "graphlcal comments" appropriate to each sto~y.. Eventually, the Gesamtkunstwerk of the American magazine adopted a particular, co[llll1ercial form. Publishers learned that they could cut subscription and newsstand prices radically, so long as they sold enough ads to recoup the loss they made on every copy of their magazine. Richard Ohmann and others have shown that as advertising itself became more professional, editors offered to work with advertisers and the makers of products, turning their magazines into magasins in the French sense: colleruons of attractive products, some to be read and others to be bought, rather like the Sears catalogue of the

[N CRISIS

The Book Dematerializes

319

·cial com'Web has l the preared reg, date. In

'rs could
minutes ms each :he hunt csthemZeitung o try to itment, rs, and , as Pelse imntwas g rev:e var' tried

!type,
kribilovel they

calls
parlion the
1

~ers

iof-

~g-

same period. They encouraged readers to take a serious interest in advertising by running contests for new slogans, producing series of advertising collections that could be removed from the magazines and collected in albums, and even allowing writers to mention particular products, favorably, in their stories. Most important, the form of the magazine mutated, as editors introduced the new practice of "ad-streaming." Like Web sites, magazines used advertising to generate their income stream, they adopted as their standard form a long ribbon of text that unrolled between colorful ads, and they demanded that readers develop new skills. . The experienced reader soon learned how to consume each magazine: not in a sin!l'e, uniform way, like the old, learned quarterlies, which had confronted readers with immense blocks of text, but as a collection of materials useable for different purposes. Early in the 1950s, a New Yorker reader wrote · in to the magazine that each copy was "as efficiently used up around here as the packing plants' claim for their pork. The covers go in an art scrap book, cartoon,s & quips clipped and sent to a brother in Korea, & the fiction & book .. ' reviews( are passeled out among less fortunate acquaintances who have eame~y good will."26 Some _critics deplored the· fact that illustrated newspapefs and magazines, designed for a world in which "the rhythm of life pounds short and hard," did not foster the "tranquil and concentrated focus" 'and "surrender" demanded of the true reader. They noted querulously that ' the new emphasis on visuarinformation was designed to give a magazine "impact" in a life too hectic to allow the .individuals to read (both remarks were made by German critics in the1920s, lamenting the Americanization of German magatine cuitore.) The oddly familiar language of these critiques remihds us that our media landscape retains, and will retain, elements that wct\J.ld . have been . familiar generations ago. , ';f,he newspapers and magazines of the early years of the century did not have the near-total flexibility of the modern Web site, and their readers could not skip from one hot link to the next. But their mixture of commerce and culture, fueir juxtapositions of serious and trivial contents, and their ~bility to confront readers with the shock of the new were as wid~ly. noticed-and sometimes as forcefully deplored-by contemporaries as the similar features of the.Web. Like the Web, too, the new magazines and newspapers invited their readers to see themselves as members ofa single community. The evidence suggests that they often succeeded. Readership

320

surveys collected information about audience response; readers'
identified particular stories and articles as controversial or rewarding;

readers of magazines as diverse as the Saturday Evening Post and the Yorker professed that they kept their subscriptions because-as wrote to the latter-it says "what I think and feel"; "It has to be good because we agree with everything you say." Those who sent in such sages, as a study of the New Yorker by Mary Corey has established, in<:luc1eel
a bird curator at a museum, a UN official, an editor, doctors, enlisted men,

a British war bride and a former chorus boy-about as diverse a group as have ever shared any serious interest." In some ways, the world ofwriitina has not so much been transformed as restored to a ghostly, faster-m1oving< simulacrum of the media world of half a century ago. By contrast, the world of serious reading does seem to be changing, in related ways. As readers gain private, off-site access to treasures once fined to the British and New York Public Libraries, they may stay home in : their -pajamas rather than schlepping in; like the hard-pressed content providers in George Gissing's New Grub Stree~ to the Valley of the 'Shadow of the Book. Even in the great years of the nineteenth- and twentieth-century metropolitan library, after all,. the greatest scholars-the historian Leopold von: Ranke, for ~ample, or the social scientist Werner Sombart-did most of their work in their-own enormous collections. In Berlin, where great profes· .· sors were public figures, ricbly paid, these might contain as many as 30,000 books. It is hard to feel anything but pleasure at the thought that Google may enable impoverished graduate students to emulate the mandarins ofyesterday, and work where they like. Yet great city and university libraries have long been America's symbolic centers of culture-the nurseries of Kazins and Hofstadters. Traditionally, they have occnpied the grandest of publis buildings---m~terial, ·public testimony to the powers of the book. Pursuing one's studies in an environment like this was a way of learning an artisanal craft. Librarians, older scholars, and graduate students passed on informal advice. The librai:y's own ways of collecting information--'like the magnificent subject cards. in the old New York Public Library catalogue---rlirected the reader to extraordinary finds. And a sighting of a celebrity like Frank Manuel or Barbara Tnchman could leave a young student vibrating for weeks with the sense that hard work ·might lift bne from the Valley of the "Shadow to Parriassus.

CRISIS

Book Dematerializes

letters g; and
eNew

!aden )ense, mesuded men,

·p as
iting ving

two

lin ent

A number of great American cities have recently built big central librarleB, range in style from neo-Beaux-Arts celebrations of the traditional cui· of the book to bright, glassy, open civic centers. And as Witold Rybczyn· ·pointed out in a recent "slide-show essay" in Slate, the heavy facades and elegant, sterile reading rooms of the libraries in Chicago and San Francisco seem to be crying out "Books still matter! Conan the Librarian is still in charge!" to a public that shows little interest. By contrast, the newer libraries in Seattle and Kansas City are hip, appealing structures that deliberately de'part from tradition. Rem Koolhaas did not even equip his ziggurat in Seattle with a reading room. These buildings pull in crowds composed of everyone, from graduate students to tourists to homeless people." The lesson Rybczynski draws is simple. Books have probably passed their sell-by date, as some prophets claim. Libraries, as such, are dinosaurs, doomed to elClinction. But build a really attractive building and call it a centrallibrary-a mall with natura! light, interesting spaces, and a comic book shop, like the new library in Salt Lake City-and the punters will come. Not for the books, but for the !'J'citement and the human connections tbat only a great public space can generate. Libraries, in otb<;r words, can survive. But if they insist on their original mis~ion, they will turn into enormous, handsome ghost ships, sailing along with..al!lights on and no passengers. On the other hand, if administrators decide_ that they can save libraries by sweeping all their dusty, old-fashioned books into off-site storage and filling their cavernous, loftlike spaces with the cafes and fast computers that might woo the crowds back, these treasure. houses will degenerate into bigger versions of Starbucks or Barnes & Noble: splendid public spaces that people frequent to use electronic sources,-most of whic:!t they could lind anywhere: Neither fate seems desirable: and neither will restqre the old function of the library as a training center for the crafts of scholarship. I As the books head for off-site warehouses, moreover, reading itself seems · to be under threat. Th~ neWspapers and magazines of the years around 1900 coexisted with more stable forms of writing-above all the serious book~ . and presupposed the superiority of engaged, informed study of texts even when they did not promote it. By contrast, the hot link and the search engine· seem to symbolize a particular postmodern way of approaching texts: rapid, superficial, appropriative, and individualistic. Readers do not need to master catalogues, to walk stacks, to use bibliographies---much less to work

322

CODEX IN CRISIS

'.

through stacks of books. All they need to do is enter a word or two into Google and compile the results. Some fear that the old-fashioned scholar's memory, stored with texts not only read, but digested and turned into marrow and bone, and the old-fashioned reader's deep play with novels and poetry studied for years, have given way to endless bricolage, mosaics assembled by students and writers who know only the bits of texts they pull from the screen. Listen, for example, to Jonathan Barnes, a specialist on ancient philosophy, describe what the computer database of the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae (TLG)-a searchable, full-text archive of ancient Greek texts-has done for his field: Load it into your laptop, and you have instant access to virtually the whole ·of Greek literature. You cut and paste snippets from authors whose very names mean nothing to you. You affirm-and you're right-that a particular word used here by Plato occurs 43 times elsewhere in Greek literature. And you c..;, write an article-or a bookstuffed. with prodigious learning. (There are similar things available for Latin.) . :. The TLG is a lovely little 'resource (I think that's the word) and I use her all tl:te time. But she's strumpet-tongued: she flatters and she deceives. "what an enormous knowledge you have, my young cock-why not )enne make a real .scholar of you?" And the young cock crows on his dung-hill: he can cite anything and construe nothing." Barnes's. description of the siren song of the TLG will bring no pleasure to anyone who spends time, for example, grading papers or evaluating the work ofyoung writers. The 200,000 titles compiled by a single entrepreneur, Philip Parker, with the aid of algorithms and a staff of programmers, offer a preview of an~gly future. The shortcuts Barnes describes so witheringly are not confined to classics: in fact, they represent one version of what looks like a period style of approaching text. A report recently conimissioned by the British Library and the Joint Information Systems Committee details the reading practices of contemporary university students, using data drawn from actual search strings. Most students begin their searches for information at Google, rather than a library Web page that lists more refined search engines. Those who consult e-book sites stay on them for an average of four minutes. True,

, .The Book Dematerializes

323

students who consult e-journals stay longer: eight minutes) on average. But

around 60 percent of them look at no more than three pages of the article in question, and the majority never return to the site. The reading that most students do on the Web takes the form of "dipping," "cross-checking," and "power skimming"-just as the traditionalists croak.

Future Reading For now and for the foreseeable future, any serious reader will have to know how to travel down two very different roads simultaneously, No one should avoid the broad, smooth, and open road that leads through the screen into an electronic paradise of texts and images. But if you want to know what one of Coleridge's annotated books or an early "Spiderman" comic really looks and , feels }ike, or if you just want to read one of those_ millions of books that are being digitized but cannot as yet be opened and read-you still have to do it the old way, and you will have to for decades to come. At Kazin's beloved New York Public Library, the staff loves electronic media. The library has · made hundreds of thousands of images from its collections ac<:essible on the Web, and Google is digitizing more ·than a million ~ooks from the stacks. Still, the library has done all ihis in the knowledge that its collections comprise 53 million items. To ensure that as many of these as possible find users, it must keep bums on pews and books and documents in front of readers. When Paul Holdengraber, the. ambassador to New York from the lost realms· of European learning, organizes sellout events at Live from the New York Public Library, which thousands more hear as podcasts; or David Ferrerio, who runs the library system day to day, opens Central Branch for the first time to children, they have ""any ends in vie'Y· One is to provide the electronic media that New Yorkers need, in a setting that is no!;_ only disciplined and peaceful, but welcoming. Another, and no less important, is to keep the books and manuscripts alive ·by continuing to forge a. democratic public that will come to them. Sit in your local coffee shop and your laptop can tell you a lot, especially if you wield your search terms adeptly. But if you want deeper, more local knowledge, you will still have to take the narrower path-that leads between the lions and up the stone stairs. There-as in great libraries around the worldyou will use all the new sources, all the time. You will check musicians' names

324

CODEX IN CRISIS

and dates at Grove Music Online, read Marlowe's Doctor Faustus on Google Books or EEBO, or savor the idiosyncrasies of British justice as exhibited in the online proceedings of the Old Bailey. But these streams of data, rich as they are, will illuminate rather than eliminate the unique books and prints and manuscripts that only the library can put in front of you. For now, and for the foreseeable future, if you want to piece together the richest possible mosaic of documents and texts and images, you will have to do it in those crowded public rooms where sunlight gleams on varnished tables, as it has for more than a century, and knowledge is still embodied in millions of dusty, crumbling, smelly, irreplaceable manuscripts and books.

'lotes to Chapter 12

Notes to Pages 255-295

411

)n Hayden White's -;lassici e del mondo
~dizioni di Storia e

Wittkower, Rudolf. "Marvels of the East: A Study of the History of Monsters." Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 5 (1942), 159-197.

13. The Public Intellectual and the American University
)66.

'

do antico. 2 vols.

neory, Beiheft 30: Momigliano,. ed.
ftaliana (1988),

Much of the material in this chapter derives from Robert Morss Lovett's autobiography, All Our Years (New York: Viking, 1948) and from the Robert Morss Lovett papers, held by the University of Chicago Library, Special Collections. For the early history of the University of Chicago, see Richard Storr, Harper's University (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966), Robin Lester, Stagg~ University (Urbana: University of lllinois Press, 1995), and The Berlin Collection (Chicago: University of Chicago Library, 1979f..

;baden: HarrasArt." Metropol-

'

14. The Public Intellectual and the Private Sphere
The primary sources fOr thi~ chapter .came from the papers of my father, Samuel Grafton. R~productions of some of them can now be seen in the Hannah Arendt archive that forms par~; of the American Memory project at the Library of Con. gress (http://memory.Ioc.gov/ammem/arendthtml/resfold3.html, accessed Augnst 12, 2008). See also Hannah Arendt, The Jewish W,riting;, ed. Jerome Kohn and Ron H. Feldman (New· York: Schocken, 2007). For the Eichmann book and the controversies it h~s arous~d see esp.· Hannah Arendt ·Revisited: "Eichmann in Jerusalem" und die Folgen, ed. Gary Smith (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 2000).

I

I

·

logo, ed. Carlo
rtere, 1994, I
'

~-

'

ism: Arnaldo

itain." Journal
l, 1740-1820.

TheKroeber

15. Codex in Crisis
I. Alfred Kazin, New York jew' (New York: Kn,opf, 1978), 5-7. 2. New York Times, 14 May 2006. 3. Jean-Noel Jeanneney, Quand Google dejk /'Europe: Plaidoyer pour un sursaut (Paris: Mille et une nuits, 2005). 4. Peter ·Brown, "A Life of Learning,, Charles Homer Haskins Lecture, 2004, http://www.acls.org/op37.htm {l.ccessed 1:1 August 2008). 5. Lionel Casson, Libraries in the Ancient World (New Haven, Conn.: Yale UniversityPress, 2001). · 6. Anthony Grafton and Megan Williams, Christianity and the Transformation of the BOok (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2006). 7. Giovanni Andrea Bussi, Prefazioni aile ediztoni di Sweynheym e Pannartzprototipografi romani, ed. Massimo Miglio (Milan: il Polifilo, 1978); Edwin .Hall,

c" Journal of

.\w." Renais-

Sweynheym & Pannartz and the Origins of Printing in Italy: German Technalogy and Italian Humanism in Renaissance Rome (McMinnville, Ore.: Bird & Bull Press Jor
Phillip J. Pirages, 1991}.

'

'

412

Notes to Pages 295'--318

N<

8. "University Publishing in a Digital Age," http://www.ithaka.org/strategic
-services/university-publishing (accessed 13 August 2008). 9. Jeremias Drexel, Avrifodina artium et scientiarum omnium, excerpendi solertia, omnibus litterarum amantibus monstrata (Antwerp: apud viduam Ioannis Cnob-

(C
G

bari, 1641). 10. See Mark Pattison, Isaac Casaubon, 1559--1614, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1892) and A. D. Nuttall, Dead from the Waist Down (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2003). 11. Ann Blair, "Reading Strategies for Coping with Information Overload, ca. 1550-1700," Journal of the History of Ideas 64 (2003), 11-28; Noel Malcolm, "Thomas Harrison and His 'Ark of Studies': An Episode in the History of the Organization of Knowledge," The Seventeenth Century 19 (2004), 196-232. · 12. Dora Panofskyand Erwin Panofsky, Pandora~ Box: The Changing Aspects ofa Mythical Symbol (New York: Pantheon, 1956). 13. Jonathan Rose; The Intellectual Life of the British Working Classes (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2001). 14. Fre~ont Rider, And Master ofNone (Middletown, Conn.: Godfrey Memorial Library, 1955);.Rlder, The Scholar and the Future ofthe Research Library (New York: Hadham Press, 1944); Nicholson Baker, Double Fold: Libraries and the Assault on Paper (New York: Random House, 2001). 15. ·Baker, Double Fold. 16. For the OCLC WorldMap, see http://www.oclc.org/research!projects/world map/default.htm {accessed 13 August 2008). 17. Kazin,New York jew, 7. 18. See further Robert Townsend, "Google Books: What's Not to Like?" AHA To. day, 29 April2007, http:/!blog.historians.org!articles/204/google-books-whalll-not -to-like, and discussiOn thread. 19. William Bentinck-Smith, Bui'lding a Great Library: The Coolidge Years at ·Harvard (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Library, 1976). 20. White Trash Scriptorium, http://www.ipa.net/-magreyn/ (accessed 13 August 2008); Phnological Museulii, ·http://www.philological.bharn.ac.uk/ (accessed ·August 13, 2008). 21. John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid, The Social Life of Information (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2000),173-174. 22. See http://findarticles.com/p/anicles/mi_mOEIN/is_2005_0ct_l2/ai_n!S686!31 (atcessed 13 August 2008). . · · 0 23. Ved Mehta, Rememb;ring Mr. Shawn~ New Yorker: The Invisible Art of Editing (Woodstock, N.Y.: Overlook Press,l998), 338. 24. For' Andrew Abbote& papers -on libraries and research, see http://home .uchicago.edu/-aabbott!booksandpapers.html (accessed 13 August 2008). · 25. Peter Fritzsche, Reading Berlin 1900 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996).

Notes to Pages 295-318

Notes to Pages 319-322

413

vvv.ithaka. o rg/strategic

'-lm, excerpendi solertia,
iduam Joannis Cnob-

I. (Oxford: Clarendon w Haven, Conn.: Yale
nation Overload, ca. -28; Noel ,Malcolm,
te

26. Mary Corey, The World Through a Monocle: The New Yorker at Midcentury (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999), 15-16. 27. Ibid., IS. 28. Witold Rybczynski, "How Do You Build a Public Library in the Age of Google?" Slate, 27 February 2008. 29. jonathan Barnes, "Bagpipe Music," Topoi 25 {2006), 17-20, at 18.

History of the Or), !96-232.

-:hanging Aspects ofa ,rking Glasses (New
Godfrey Memorial

Library (New York: and t/u: Assault on

'ch/projects/world , ,
~

o Like?" AHA To .. -:_' books-whats-not ·' ·

coolidge Years at
accessed 13 Au7 tc.uk/ (accessed

