THE

NATURE
OF TH E

BOOK
Print and Kjtowledge in the <..7vfaking
ADRIAN JOHNS

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS CHICAGO AND LONDON

ADRIAN JOHNS is assistant professor in the Department of Sociology and Science Studies Program at the University of California, San Diego.

The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637 The University of Chicago Press, Lrd., London © 1998 by The University of Chicago All rights reserved. Published 1998 07 06 05 04 03 02 01 00 99 98 ISBN: 0-226-40121-9 (cloth) 2 3 4 5

Libraty of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Adrian. The nature of the book: print and knowledge in the making I Adrian Johns. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index. ISBN: 0-226-4°121-9 (a1k. paper). I. Printing-Social aspects-Europe-History. 2. Printing-Social aspects-England-History. 3. Books-Europe-History. 4. BooksEngland-History. 5. Europe-Intellectual life. 6. EnglandIntellectual life. 7. Transmission of texts. 8. Science-EuropeHistory. 9. Science-England-History. 10. Science publishingEurope-History. II. Science publishing-England-History. I. Tide. Z124.J64 1998 686.2' 094-dc21 97-47252

CIP

@ The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of the American National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1992.

CONTENTS

List ofIllustrations / xi Acknowledgments / xv A Note on Conventions / xix 1/ INTRODUCTION: The Book of Nature and the Nature of the Book

2 /

LITERATORY LIFE: The Culture and Credibility of the Printed Book in Early Modern London

58
3/ "THE ADVANCEMENT OF WHOLESOME KNOWLEDGE": The Politics of Print and the Practices of Propriety
18 7

4 / JOHN STREATER AND THE KNIGHTS OF THE GALAXY: Republicanism, Natural Knowledge, and the Politics of Printing 266 5 / FAUST AND THE PIRATES: The Cultural Construction of the Printing Revolution
32 4

6 / THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING: Print and the Passions

ix

x

CONTENTS

7 / PIRACY AND USURPATION: Natural Philosophy in the Restoration

444

8 / HISTORIES OF THE HEAVENS: John Flamsteed, Isaac Newton,
and the Historia Gelestis Britannica

543

9 / CONCLUSION
622

Bibliography / 641 Index/7 0 9

1

INTRODUCTION

The 1300k of Jl{gture and the Jl{gture of the 1300k

ick up a modern book. This one will do: the one you are looking at right now. What sort of object is this? There are certain features about it of which you can be reasonably confident. Its professed author does indeed exist and did indeed write it. It contains information believed to be accurate, and it professes to impart knowledge to readers like you. It is produced with its author's consent, and it is indeed the edition it claims to be. If the dust jacket announces that it is the product of a given organization-in this case the University of Chicago Press-then this too may be believed. Perhaps you may even say to yourself that that fact vouches for the quality of its content. You may safely assume that the book you now hold will have been printed in many copies, and a copy of the same book bought in Australia, say, will be identical in all relevant respects to one bought in the United States or in Great Britain. Begin to use this object. It should immediately become clear that there are things about its proper utilization of which a reader like you can be equally confident. This book has not been produced with a specific, individual reader in mind. To some extent, at least, it is a commercial product, designed to appeal to purchasers. Its cost may have limited its readership somewhat, but its distribution will still have been fairly widespread, and it may be available for consultation in a number of libraries. Readers will not have to endure any formal vetting or approval process before being permitted to read this book. You yourself are free to carry it around and to lend it to others. You are not free, however-beyond certain legal limits-to reproduce its contents in your own right for commercial gain. Nor may you now proceed to issue translations, epitomes, or abridgments of those contents. It is improbable (but not impossible) that you will choose to declaim the text of this book aloud in a public place, and it is even more unlikely that you will make it the focus of a collective act of commemoration, worship, or similar ritual. Some books are indeed used in these ways, incidentally, but this is probably not going to be one of them. In short, while in

P

2

CHAPTER ONE

some respects this book's usage is up to you, in others it appears to be quite closely constrained. That we can assume all these things of such an object-that such an object actually exists-derives from our living in what many people call "print culture." Such phenomena, we say, are due to printing. Or rather, we would say this, but so infallibly reliable are they that we rarely even have to articulate the relation. It is obvious, self-evident, even necessary. The practical consequence is that we do not have to agonize over the reliability of a published book before we can put it to use. We do not need to undertake investigatory work to confirm that its author does exist and that its text is authorized. No literary spy need be hired to ascertain that it was indeed made by its stated publisher and that its contents will be the same as those of another copy of the same book found in any other place. In our world, all these characteristics are inherent in virtually any published book (and the duties of a "literary agent" are comparatively mundane). We take them for granted, every day of our lives. We depend on them, and our reliance is, by and large, justified. It is this very self-evidence that encourages us to ascribe all these characteristics to a technological order of reality. Ifcalled upon, we may assert that printed texts are identical and reliable because that is simply what printing is. The identification is as momentous as it is straightforward. It has become the point of departure for all current interpretations of print and its cultural consequences, and is the root from which the very concept of "print culture" has grown. 1 It is thereby also the foundation of a conviction that that culture has rendered possible the establishment of veracious knowledge in modern society. Yet this book argues that it is substantially false. Not only that: The Nature ofthe Book maintains that it is probably the most powerful force resisting the acceptance ofa truly historical understanding ofprint and any cultural consequences it may foster. This book contends that what we often regard as essential elements and necessary concomitants of print are in fact rather more contingent than generally acknowledged. Veracity in particular is, it argues, extrinsic to the press itself, and has had to be grafted onto it. The same may be said of other cognate attributes associated with printing. In short, The Nature ofthe Book claims that the very identity of print itself has had to be made. It came to be as we now experience it only by virtue of hard work, exercised over generations and across nations. That labor has long been overlooked, and is not now evident. But its very obscurity is revealing. It was dedicated to effacing its own traces, and necessarily so: only if such efforts disappeared could
I. For this term, see below, pp. 10-11, and Eisenstein, Printing Press, I, 43-159. I am not sure of its genesis; Eisenstein, its prime recent exponent, seems to take it from McLuhan (e.g., Gutenberg Galaxy, 146-9).

INTRODUCTION

3

printing gain the air of intrinsic reliability on which its cultural and commercial success could be built. Recovering it is therefore a difficult task, but one well worth attempting. This book tries accordingly to excavate the complex issues involved in the historical shaping of print-issues that our conventional notion of print culture obscures with all the authority of a categorical definition. The Nature ofthe Book is the first real attempt to portray print culture in the making. Yet how could print conceivably be anything else? If it were really the result of a significant process of historical construction, then surely we could not now find it so obvious, universal, and undeniable. If it could have developed differently, then surely it would now differ noticeably from place to place, and in anyone place it would still bear the traces of its development. We would see the wreckage of failed alternatives all about us. In practical terms, we would indeed have to worry about the specific status of a given printed book in order to use it. Questions of where it had come from, who had made it, and whether or not its putative author acknowledged its content would all need to be posed and answered before we could safely trust any printed book. That they do not constitutes a powerful reason to accept the obvious. Even a little reflection suggests that there is greater complexity to the subject than this. Any printed book is, as a matter of fact, both the product of one complex set of social and technological processes and also the starting point for another. In the first place, a large number of people, machines, and materials must converge and act together for it to come into existence at all. How exactly they do so will inevitably affect its finished character in a number of ways. In that sense a book is the material embodiment of, if not a consensus, then at least a collective consent. Its identity can be understood accordingly, in terms of these intricate processes. But the story of a book evidently does not end with its creation. How it is then put to use, by whom, in what circumstances, and to what effect are all equally complex issues. Each is worthy of attention in its own right. So a printed book can be seen as a nexus conjoining a wide range of worlds of work. Look closely and you are likely to find simplicity and inevitability in neither the manufacture of an object like this nor its subsequent construal. The processes leading to the deployment of a book and those consequent upon its use both depend on too many contingencies. That in turn means that print cannot be as straightforward as it seems. One way to appreciate the implications is to examine more closely places where printing exists, but where its cultural consequences seem very different from those familiar to us. There are two such places, separated from us by space and by time. The first may be found in certain regions of the world where, to international publishers' disgust, so-called "piracy" has become a

4

CHAPTER ONE

prevalent commercial practice. You could not be so sure of all those "selfevident" facts about this book if you had bought your copy in such a place. It might indeed prove reliable. But it might also have been produced by an anonymous manufacturer, and have different contents. Its purported author might have no idea of the claims it contained. Some such companies produce not just unauthorized reprints of existing books, but wholly new texts claiming to be written by best-selling authors. Their products threaten to compromise both the economic production of authorized works and, by generating correspondingly divergent readings, their reception. The potential effects are suggested by the most notorious of all recent controversies to arise from publishing. The author Salman Rushdie was complaining of piracy of his works in Pakistan and India long before the appearance of his Satanic Verses. When it did appear, the book was properly published in neither country; the protests that occurred in Lahore and elsewhere, and that first set in train the events leading eventually to Khomeini's fatwa, centered on the public reading of unauthorized copies and photocopied extracts. A Penguin representative even noted that piracy would permit readers to circumvent the Indian government's subsequent ban on the book. 2 Rushdie's is admittedly an extreme case. But for good or ill, countless authors and publishers have encountered to some degree the loss of control induced by piracy. It means that the experiences associated with print are indeed different from those familiar to most Western readers. And any suggestion that the intrinsic cultural consequences of technology have simply been inadequately realized in such settings would be difficult to endorse. The evidence of recent international trade disputes indicates that modern technology, far from eliminating such practices, may even be facilitating them. The arguments currently raging over such matters are intense and important. Few claim to know how they will end. 3 The alternative is to look not to other places in our own time, but to other times in our own place. It is possible to argue not only that print may differ from place to place, but also that its nature has changed over time even in our own society. If this is so, the implications are again substantial, but in rather different ways. Such an argument compels us to reappraise where our own concept of print culture comes from, how it developed, w?en it took hold, and why its sway continues to seem secure. These are
2. The Times, 24 November 1984; Appignanesi and Maitland, Rushdie File, 42; Pipes, Rushdie Affair, 24, 85, II3, 201-2.

3. These disputes extend far beyond "copyright" as conventionally understood, and include conventions now being forged to cover the "inventions" and "texts" produced in areas such as biotechnology and genome research. The economic, cultural, and moral implications at stake in these, as in the battles raging over computer and music software. are truly massive. For confrontations between the USA and China over the latter, see Faison, "Copyright Pirates."

INTRODUCTION

5

some of the questions addressed in the following chapters. Tactically forgetting that we ourselves "know" what printing is, The Nature ofthe Book begins by asking the question ofwhat printing was. It addresses how the people of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries constructed and construed the craft, in their own setting and for their own ends. This entails comprehending the complex social processes by which books came to be made and used in their society-the society in which printing first really thrived, and in which any consequences it might have were first fully manifested. The result is that what began as a tactical decision to forget our own knowledge is soon vindicated as rather more. As chapter 2 will show in detail, early modern printing was not joined by any obvious or necessary bond to enhanced fidelity, reliability, and truth. That bond had to be forged. If an early modern reader picked up a printed book-De Natura Libri, perhaps-then he or she could not be immediately certain that it was what it claimed to be, and its proper use might not be so self-evident. Piracy was again one reason: illicit uses of the press threatened the credibility of all printed products. More broadly, ideas abour the correct ways to make and use books varied markedly from place to place and time to time. But whatever the cause, it is not easy for us to imagine such a realm, in which printed records were not necessarily authorized or faithful. What could one know in such a realm, and how could one know it? We ourselves rourinely rely on stable communications in our making and maintenance of knowledge, whether of the people around us or of the world in which we live. That stability helps to underpin the confidence we feel in our impressions and beliefs. Even the brisk skepticism we may express about certain printed materials-tabloid newspapers, say-rests on it, inasmuch as we feel confident that we can readily and consistently identify what it is that we are scorning. Instability in records would equally rapidly translate into uncertainty of judgment. The most immediate implication, then, would be epistemic. In a sense, the point is a well-entrenched one. It has been made at least since the sixteenth century, when printers and others took to lauding their craft for its power to preserve. The contrast they drew was with previous scribal forms of reproduction, which they delineated as intrinsically corruptive. It now seems almost indisputable. We should recognize, however, that the first identification of that contrast was partly a product of interest. Printers stood to gain from what was originally a contentious argument, not a straightforward observation. If, on the other hand, it is not printing per se that possesses preservative power, but printing put to use in particular ways, then we ourselves may usefully draw some rather different distinctions. We may look not just for differences between print and manuscript reproduction, but for different ways in which the press itself and its products have been (and continue to be) employed. The roots of textual stability may be

6

CHAPTER ONE

sought as much in these practices as in the press itself. And knowledge, such as it is, has come to depend on that stability. Here, then, is one way in which a social history of print can prove not just interesting, but consequential. A reappraisal of print in the making can contribute to our historical understanding of the conditions of knowledge itself.
TYCHO BRAHE, GALILEO GALILEI, AND THE PROBLEMS OF "PRINT CULTURE"

The central concern of this book is the relation between print and knowledge. As its title suggests, to pursue this theme it focuses in particular on natural knowledge-knowledge of Creation and of humanity's place within it. To that extent, The Nature ofthe Book may be regarded as contributing to the discipline known, rather anachronistically, as the history of science. 4 It proposes a new account of how early modern Europeans put printing to use to create and maintain knowledge about the natural world. The focus on the history of science is not, however, an exclusive one. The ambit of The Nature ofthe Book is not exhausted by scientific knowledge, and none of its conclusions should be regarded as restricted to science alone. Science is treated here as just one among a range of activities characterized by the creation and use of knowledge. The historical problems identified in the course of this book were so general that they applied to all of them, from scriptural exegesis, through astronomy, experiment, and alchemy, to the formation of political ideologies and representations of gender. All make their appearances in the following chapters. Nonetheless, the widely accepted status of modern science as the most objective, valuable, and robust kind of knowledge currently available makes it a peculiarly appealing subject for the historian of printing. 5 This high status means that any conclusions demonstrable for science stand a chance of being accredited a fortiori for other activities now held in lower repute. Furthermore, the history of science offers an unusually clear opportunity to discuss the assumptions and implications of the historiography of print. For it is in the history of science that one finds the figure who, more than any other, personifies print culture as conventionally understood. That figure is the Danish nobleman and astronomer Tycho Brahe (fig. 1.1).
4. As explained further below, I share other historians' doubts about using the terms "science" and "scientist" in reference to periods before they became recognized by contemporaries, and will therefore employ them sparingly in this book. For the issues involved, see Jardine, "Writing Off the Scientific Revolution"; Copenhaver, "Did Science Have a Renaissance?"; Pickstone, "Past and Present Knowledges"; and the polemical argument in Cunningham and Williams, "De-centring the 'Big Picture.''' 5. I should stress the attributive and pragmatic character of such a representation; claims that scientific knowledge actually is objective are, of course, extremely controversial, and the image of science as such has been questioned many times.

FIG. I.I. Tycho Brahe: different representations for different readers. (top left) Hand-copied portrait. Reproduced from Tycho Brahe, Opera Omnia, 1. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge Universiry Library.) (top right) Printed portrait from the work in which Tycho attacked Ursus. Tycho Brahe, EpistolarumAstronomicarum Libri. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge Universiry Library.) (above left) Tycho with his mural quadrant, as portrayed in a presentation impression of the Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica (1598). (By permission of the British Library, C45.h.3.) (above right) Michael Sparke's English version of Tycho's mural quadrant portrait, published with his astrological prophecy in 1632 as Learned Tico Brahae his Astronomical! Conjectur. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge Universiry Library.)

8

CHAPTER ONE

FIG. 1.2. Changing representations of Uraniborg. (above) Elevation, as shown in Tycho's own publication. Tycho Brahe, Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica (1598). (By permission of the British Library, C45.h.3.) (opposite) Elevation, as printed after Tycho's death. Currius [L. Barrerrus, pseud.], Historia Ca?lestis. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge Universiry Library.)

In 1576 the king of Denmark granted Tycho feudal powers over a small island named Hven, lying in the sound just north of Copenhagen. Here Tycho erected a remarkable castle-observatory, in which he lived and worked for the next two decades. His work at this palatial observatory, which he called Uraniborg (fig. 1.2), resulted in an unequaled series of observations and interpretations of the heavens. They secured for him a reputation as the greatest of all astronomers. Almost immediately, Tycho himself became an icon of the very enterprise of astronomy. Mathematical practitioners in succeeding generations came to see in him an unimpugnable model of the harmony of nobility and "mechanic" skill. In the hands of modern historians, moreover, Tycho has again proved a powerful emblem, in two important and revealingly paradoxical respects. First, Uraniborg has become the outstanding Renaissance exemplar of the importance of locale in the making of knowledge. 6 This is an important issue, to be addressed
6. Hannaway, "Laboratory Design." Shackelford has responded to Hannaway, with more heat than really necessary, in ''Tycho Brahe."

10

CHAPTER ONE

later in this chapter. At the same time, however, Tycho has come to personify the role of print in transcending place and rendering natural knowledge universal. He has thus become emblematic of the transformation of local craft into global science. This latter apotheosis has been due above all to Elizabeth Eisenstein's The Printing Press as an Agent ofChange. Published in 1979, this is still probably the most influential anglophonic interpretation of the cultural effects of printing. Yet The Nature ofthe Book pursues for the most part a quite different approach from hers. A consideration of Tycho Brahe provides the ideal opportunity to specify how and why it does SO.7 The unifying concept of Eisenstein's argument is that of "print culture." This "culture" is characterized primarily in terms of certain traits that print is taken to endow on texts. Specifically, those produced in such an environment are subject to conditions of standardization, dissemination, and fixity. The last of these is perhaps the most important. According to Eisenstein, printing meant the mass reproduction of precisely the same text, repeatable on subsequent occasions and in different locations. No longer need any work suffer the increasing corruption that Eisenstein assumes to be endemic to any "script culture." She focuses on this attribute of fixity as the most important corollary of the press, seeing it as central to most of the effects of print culture. 8 For example, in conditions of fixity the simple practice of juxtaposing texts became immensely significant. Newly available printed representations of opposing astronomical, anatomical, or other knowledge could be placed side by side, and their viewer could now be confident that conclusions drawn from comparing such reliable texts would be worthwhile. Correspondents on the other side of Europe could do the same, with representations that could be supposed identical. 9 Such scholars no longer needed to concern themselves primarily with the fidelity of their representations, and were freed from spending their lives eradicating scribal mistakes. It was fixity that liberated them from such labor and thus made possible the progressive improvement of knowledge. This is the basis on which
7. Eisenstein, Printing Press, abridged as Printing Revolution. For examples of Eisenstein's influence in a range of fields, see Tribble, Margins and Marginality, 3- 4; Neuschel, Word of Honor, chap. 6; Olson, World on Paper, 37 and passim; Rose, Authors and Owners, 3-4; Sommerville, Secularization, 48, 70, 79, 178, 180, 219 n. I; Anderson, Imagined Communities, 30-49; Eamon, Science and the Secrets ofNature, 6-9, 94-6; Lowood and Rider, "Literary Technology and Typographic Culture" (where "typographic culture" and "print culture" are indistinguishable). Many more could be cited. It is difficult to be sure, but I would estimate that Tycho Brahe is referred to at least as frequently in Printing Press as any other Renaissance figure. 8. Eisenstein, Printing Press, 71-88, II3-26. 9. Eisenstein, Printing Press, 74-5, 597; Printing Revolution, 42-88. It is worth pointing out that these phenomena are similar to those attributed by anthropologists to the invention of writing, e.g., in Goody, Logic ofWriting, 134-8, 174.

INTRODUCTION

11

Eisenstein can claim that the Renaissance and Reformation were rendered permanent by the very permanence of their canonical texts, that nationalism developed thanks to the stabilization of laws and languages, and that science itself became possible on the basis of phenomena and theories reliably recorded. 10 With this new foundation ofcertainty at their disposal, "scientists" (as Eisenstein insists on calling them) could begin to develop new doubts about their previous authority, namely antiquity. The "Scientific Revolution" was thus inconceivable without a preceding printing revolution. I I And for Eisenstein Tycho Brahe personifies both. Eisenstein's Tycho was an autodidact. This in itself was remarkable: before the printing revolution, not enough faithful editions could have been amassed in one place to enable him to teach himself. But while he was doing this, Tycho was able to place authoritative printed representations of the Copernican and Ptolemaic systems of the heavens side by side before his eyes. By this simple process of juxtaposition, he could immediately see that there were serious discrepancies. Later, working on Hven, he instigated a program to rectify the data and theories on which astronomy was based. He and his assistants labored for years to produce a systematic corpus of recorded observations of the heavenly bodies, using not only Tycho's own careful observations but those sent to him by astronomers across central Europe. When ready, Tycho could then supervise the correct printing of this vital material in his own printing house, using paper made in his own paper mill (figs. 1.3 and 1.4). As a result, one nova-"Tycho's star," as it came to be called-became "fixed" to the extent that it continued to be shown on celestial globes long after it had disappeared from the sky. 12 In this guise has Eisenstein's Tycho entered a current debate over science itself. Bruno Latour has built an account of the making and power ofscience on her representation of a print culture, first in his concept of "immutable mobiles" 13 and more recently in that of "mediators." 14 Latour identifies the collection and deployment of durable paper entities as the foundation
10. Eisenstein, Printing Press, 80, II7, 180-2, 200-10, 212, 646. The argument about nationalism has since been developed more thoroughly by Anderson in Imagined Communities, esp. 41-9. II. Eisenstein, Printing Press, 107, 186, 193-4, 197, 640; Hunter, "Impact of Print"; Leed, "Elizabeth Eisenstein's The Printing Press as an Agent ofChange." 12. Eisenstein, Printing Press, 577, 583-4, 593, 596-603, 623-5, 629-3°, 640, 699. 13. Latour, Science in Action, 52, 132-44, 226; Latour, "On the Powers of Association"; Latour, "Visualization and Cognition." Compare also Latour, "Give Me a Laboratory"; Latour and Woolgar, Laboratory Life, 45-53, 69-88; and Calion, Law, and Rip, Mapping the Dynamics ofScience and Technology, 7-14, 35-99. 14. Latour, Have Never Been Modern, 77-82, 128-9, 138; Latour, "Technology Is Society Made Durable," 104- 6, 127; Latour, "Where Are the Missing Masses?" 237.

1.3. Uraniborg. Ground plan, showing Tycho Brahe's printing house (at B). Tycho Brahe, Astronomiae lnstauratae Mechanica (1598). (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)
FIG.

D

FIG. 1.4. The island of Hven. (above) Map from Tycho Brahe's manuscripts, showing the paper mill in relation to Uraniborg. Tycho Brahe, Opera Omnia, IV. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.) (opposite) The printed map issued by Tycho in his Astronomiae lnstauratae Mechanica (1598). (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

INTRODUCTION

13

..... )

.1

-

of science's success. The creation and circulation of such objects, Latour maintains, enabled Tycho to master natural and social entities that were otherwise beyond reach. He could use print both to capture heavenly bodies, as Eisenstein claimed, and, furthermore, effectively to turn every observatory in Europe into an extension of Uraniborg. This he achieved by distributing printed forms on which astronomers could enter their observations before returning them to the central site of Hven. 15 In doing so, he pioneered a practice central to the development of modern science. For this, Latour thinks, is essentially how the modern laboratory sustains its authority too. The Latourian laboratory is an inscription engine, dedicated to the construction, collation, dispersal, and accommodation of such materials. It is a compelling and enormously influential argument. And it is consonant not only with Eisenstein herself, but more extensively still with her inspiration and bete noire, Marshall McLuhan. 16 Latour's vision of science in
15. Latour, Science in Action, 52, 132-44, 226-7; Latour, "Drawing Things Together"; Latour, "Visualization and Cognition," 11-14; Latour, "Politics of Explanation," 159; Calion, Law, and Rip, "Putting Texts in Their Place," 223, 228-9. 16. A plausible summary of McLuhan's views in relation to Latour's might run as follows. Like Latour, McLuhan urged the importance of what he called the "network" as a category of analysis, important in deciding ways of perceiving the world. He too identified a railway system as the representative network par excellence (compare Latour, we Have Never Been Modern, II?; and Latour, Aramis). What McLuhan's networks achieve-what lends them their power-is their ability to produce changes in scale. They permit individuals and organizations to localize and universalize by allowing them to magnifY and reduce traces of the

CHAPTER ONE

action depends on Eisenstein's "print culture"-and thereby implicitly on McLuhan's "Gutenberg Galaxy"-to underwrite the stability of both knowledge and society. I? The Tycho of Eisenstein and Latour has become the incarnation of textual, social, and epistemic order. But just how credible is this Tycho? There is something altogether too neat, too immaculate, about the figure and his achievements. As Philip Marlowe put it in The Big Sleep, such testimony displays "the austere simplicity of fiction rather than the tangled woof of fact." 18 Maybe the Tycho so far portrayed will change somewhat ifwe investigate more closely how his "mediators" actually came into being and were put to use. For Tycho does indeed represent perhaps the purest example of a particular kind of printing, and a particular way of using the products of the press. Like Regiomontanus before him, and Hevelius after, he controlled his own printing operation. His was a singular printing house, however. It was as geographically isolated on the island of Hven as it was socially isolated from the companies of the European book trade. It was even physically embedded in the five-meter high, five-meter thick wall that enclosed his entire estate. Such isolation meant, at least in principle, that Tycho could produce books when, for whom, and in whatever form he liked. 19 Works like his Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica, which described Uraniborg in all its glory, were scarcely intended to be published at all, but were to be distributed as gifts to patrons at courts and universities (fig. 1.5). The more prestigious were not just printed books, but hybrids-hand-colored, individualized tributes, presented to their intended recipients on specific dates. 2o Tycho meant to bypass the structures of the international book trade altogether.
things on which they wish to operate to roughly the same size without destroying them. The "message" of his networks is that they permit such control; and what is perceived as reality is in fact the current state of competing networks in dynamic interaction. The boundary between natural and social must therefore be forgotten when considering them. In such a world of natural/social hybrids, power comes from "translation." This is the agency by which we "enlarge the scope of [our] action" and affect sites distant from ourselves. See McLuhan, Understanding Media, 3-21, 56-61, 89-105, 338-45, 346-59; compare Latour, Science in Action, 108-21, 223-32, 247-57, and We Have Never Been Modern, 10-12, 49-142. A reassessment of McLuhan is, I think, overdue, though attention to his work is currently reviving. Eisenstein herself roundly denied following him, but with an insistence and a perseverance that almost amounted to protesting too much: e.g., Printing Press, ix-xi, xvii, 40-1, 88, 129,171. 17. Compare Shapin, "Following Scientists Around," 541, 545-6. 18. Chandler, Chandler Collection, I, 143. 19. Thoren, Lord ofUraniborg, 144. 20. Brahe, Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica (1598); Brahe, Opera Omnia, V, 317-8. A list of known copies with their recipients is in Norlind, Tycho Brahe, 286-93.

INTRODUCTION

FIG. 1.5. The presentation of an astronomical volume to an absolute monarch: Hevelius offering his Cometographia to Louis XIV of France. The vignette portrays Hevelius's dedication of the book to Louis; it does not represent a real scene. Hevelius, Cometographia. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

The recipient of a book like Tycho's Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica was thus likely to be found in a distinctive place: a royal court or a university. Here a book took its place and gained its meaning only amid a vast arsenal of other objects directed to similar ends. It would be encountered alongside natural curiosities, thaumaturgical wonders, mathematical devices, paintings, musical compositions, alchemical medallions, magical machines, and other books (fig. 1.6). In such surroundings, every aspect of appearance and handling mattered for creating an impact. The reader of such a work, in such a place, would be consciously engaging in a distinctive system of practices and ideas-in Tycho's case, feudal ones. The giving and receiving of such gifts was an important part of court culture, enmeshed in conventions of status recognition, reciprocation, and reward. This could not fail to affect the way in which that reader regarded the book. It was invested with enhanced credit, being untainted by "mechanick" influence, and it was accorded the privileged reception due to such a noble gesture. 21 The veracity of its contents warranted respect. They could not be dismissed without cost. Yet at the same time such a gesture all but commanded creative responsesincluding challenges-from suitably prestigious interlocutors. Tycho's book would now fall subject to the conventions surrounding philosophical and mathematical dispures in these settings. The variables that determined both whether a "scientific" debate would even take place, and, once battle had been joined, how it would proceed, were local ones: to whom one pre21. Westman, "Astronomer's Role." See also Hannaway, "Laboratory Design"; and compare Eamon, "Court, Academy and Printing House," 41.

16

CHAPTER ONE

FIG. 1.6. The place of books in the cabinet of curiosities. In places like this-a museum of curiosities in Naples-books, along with crocodiles, fossils, and a panoply of natural and artificial marvels, served to facilitate conversation (see Find/en, "Courting Nature," 68-9). Imperato, Historia Naturale. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

sented the book, through which channels it was distributed, with which patron it was identified. Disputes like this were affairs of honor, conducted through appropriate intermediaries and champions. Printed books were their vehicles. That was what they were for. 22 When, therefore, Tycho found himself attacked by Nicolai Reymers Baer (or Ursus), a recognized mathematician but a man of low birth whom he himself had accused of plagiarism, a scientific debate was not the principal outcome. Rather unusually, Tycho did in fact deign to reply himself. But
22. In addition to the works of Biagioli and Hannaway cited here, see Findlen, "Economy of Exchange"; Find/en, "Courting Nature," esp. 61; Moran, Alchemical World, esp. 9, 93 - 4, 97, 1I0-2; Smith, Business ofAlchemy, 49-50; Daston, "Factual Sensibility"; and Davis, "Beyond the Market." Compare also the difficulties experienced by Becher in translating commercial documents for courtly readers: Smith, Business ofAlchemy, 139.

INTRODUCTION

17

he did so with a series of elaborately indignant letters to his fellows across Europe, which he had printed on his press at Uraniborg and circulated in 1596. In this correspondence he recited the tale ofUrsus's alleged theft and argued that, whatever the date ofUrsus's publication, Tycho had printed the cosmology first. Ever willing to recall his opponent's low birth, he even seems to have suggested that Ursus be executed for his presumption. But the more philosophical side of the dispute he delegated to a second, the relatively humble Kepler. The result was Kepler's "Defense ofTycho against Ursus," a remarkably sophisticated historical argument for the status of astronomical hypotheses and their creators. It was never printed. 23 Much even of this story could be taken as reinforcing Eisenstein's image. However, two elements make it less confirmatory. The first is that Tycho was extremely atypical in his successful use of print. Other writers regarded him not as representative of their own situation, but as a model that they sought, with widely varying degrees of success, to emulate. Like most icons, he stood for an ideal that was unrealizable. The second is that, as his argument against Ursus implies, even Tycho himself found the ideal impossible to achieve. That was why he built his own printing house and paper mill: he discovered that he could not otherwise obtain acceptable materials and workmanship.24 Even with these in place, moreover, most of his work remained unprinted until after his death. 25 Latour's preprinted forms, for example, seem to be mythical; Tycho did correspond extensively, but left no trace of having used such objects. 26 And while he began producing the images and descriptions for the Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica as early as
23. Brahe, Epistolarum Astronomicarum Libri, 33-4, 148-51; Brahe, Opera Omnia, VI, 61-2,179; Jardine, Birth ofHistory and Philosophy ofScience, 9-28 and passim (15 for Ursus's peasant background); Dreyer, Tycho Brahe, 183; Rosen, Three Imperial Mathematicians. Ty-

cho's decision to strike at Ursus personally (which Kepler, for one, found surprising) may well be related to the fact that, as Hannaway points out, his status was feudal in origin; Tycho was not a courtier. See Hannaway, "Laboratory Design," 589 n. II. For Tycho's conflicts see also Gingerich and Westman, Wittich Connection (which contrasts Tycho's treatment ofUrsus to his response to the relatively well-born Wittich), and Thoren, Lord ofUraniborg. I am grateful to Robert Westman for conversations about this affair, which remains one of the more controversial among scholars of early modern astronomy. 24. Brahe, Opera, VI, 224, 365 n; VII, 214, 274; IX, 175; X, 302. Even with the mill in working order, he remained reliant on the cooperation of nearby parishioners to provide raw materials, as they were exhorted to do in regular "rag sermons." 25. In particular, the star catalogue (circulated only in manuscript until years after Tycho's death, and then inaccurately printed) and the Astronomiae Instauratae Progymnasmata (begun at Uraniborg, but completed only under the aegis of his heirs in 1602). 26. I have found no trace of these preprinted forms in Tycho's Opera Omnia, nor in any relevant secondary authority. I am also unable to find Latour's source for this central claim; it may well derive from an imaginative reading of certain passages in Eisenstein's Printing Press, e.g., 626-7.

18

CHAPTER ONE

1585, soon after building his printing house, the volume was not completed until thirteen years later. By that time he was in exile in Hamburg-the only place he could find with printers capable of finishing the book, even though he had brought his own press with him from Hven. Taken by his son to the Holy Roman Emperor, the book now became an instrument in Tycho's attempt to secure imperial patronage. 27 This proved successful, and he removed to Prague. But he soon discovered that even here, in the center of the empire, no printer able to undertake his prized star catalogue could be found. He was reduced to circulating hand-copied versions, and the catalogue remained unprinted on his death (fig. 1.7).28 At that point his works began to fallout of court circles altogether. They descended into the hands of the book trade. Even the Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica was reprinted commercially. Such books were likely to be produced to different standards. They stood at risk of piracy and imitation, despite Rudolf II's stern commands forbidding such "printers' frauds." They were also likely to be read in different ways, by different people, in different places and for different reasons. Their accreditation became far more insecure. So, for example, the English astronomer royal, John Flamsteed-who, as we shall see, identified himself profoundly with Tycho-dismissed the posthumous printing of his star tables as, quite simply, a "fraud." 29 Tycho's inscriptions appear to have become distinctly mutable once they fell out of his control and left the courtly matrix (fig. 1.8). Ifeven Tycho Brahe found it so difficult to maintain his printed materials as mobile and immutable, what hope is there ofexplaining the achievements of less powerful figures in Eisenstein's terms? Attempting to do so would mean attributing to printed books themselves attributes of credibility and persuasion that actually took much work to maintain. It would thereby draw our attention away from important problems that any individual, even Tycho, had to overcome. 30 Talk of "print culture" is strangely ethereal when compared to Tycho's struggles. It stands oddly disconnected from the professed experiences of real historical figures. For example, who actually
27. Brahe, Opera, V, 317-8; VIII, 166, 177, 388. 28. Thoren, Lord of Uraniborg, 150, 185-7, 367, 381-97, 414-5, 421, 478. Tycho had planned to present the catalogue to Rudolf II on New Year's Day, apparently a customary occasion for gift-giving: Kaufmann, Mastery ofNature, 106. For Rudolf II's undertaking to provide a "new Uraniborg," see Brahe, Opera, VIII, 178, 188. It is also likely, of course, that Tycho's circulation of the catalogue in manuscript was intended to enhance its status as a collectible object. 29. Brahe, Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica (1602); Curtius, Historia Gelestis; Flamsteed, Preface to John Flamsteed's "Historia Crelestis Britannica," 99-100. For Rudolf's condemnation of "Typographorum fraudem," see Brahe, Opera, II, 9. 30. Compare Schaffer, "Eighteenth Brumaire," 178-92, on the concept of the "ideal reader."

INTRODUCTION

19

printed (and reprinted) Tycho's pages? It is a question worth asking, since Tycho himself spent many frustrating years seeking suitable printers-and the astronomer Christoph Rothmann, at least, believed that Ursus had been able to plagiarize his world system because he had been employed in Tycho's printing house. 31 And how were those pages employed by their recipients? Of what use were they to them? How did Tycho ensure that such distant readers took them as authoritative, especially when, as was often the case in early modern testimony about celestial observations, they conflicted with figures produced locally? Eisenstein and Latour begin by decreeing such issues peripheral. The Nature ofthe Book does the opposite. If we are to understand how and why printed texts became trustworthy, it argues, we need to appreciate all of them, in something approaching their full "woof." The disconnected air exhibited by Eisenstein's account is not accidental. In her work, printing itself stands outside history. The press is something "sui generis," we are told, lying beyond the reach of conventional historical analysis. Its "culture" is correspondingly placeless and timeless. It is deemed to exist inasmuch as printed texts possess some key characteristic, fixity being the best candidate, and carry it with them as they are transported from place to place. The origins of this property are not analyzed. In fact, the accusations of technological determinism sometimes leveled against Eisenstein may even be wide of the mark, since she consistently declines to specify any position on the question of how print culture might emerge from printY But the example of Tycho does suggest that the focus of her approach is in practice highly selective. The portrait it generates identifies as significant only the clearest instances of fixity. It regards instances when fixity was not manifested as exceptional failures, and even in the successful cases it neglects the labors through which success was achieved. It identifies the results of those labors instead as powers intrinsic to texts. Readers consequently suffer the fate of obliteration: their intelligence and skill is reattributed to the printed page. Tycho's labors deserve better. To put it brutally, what those labors really tell us is that Eisenstein's print culture does not exist. There is an alternative. We may consider fiXity not as an inherent quality, but as a transitive one. That is, it may be more useful to reverse our commonsense assumption. We may adopt the principle that fixity exists only inasmuch as it is recognized and acted upon by people-and not otherwise. The consequence of this change in perspective is that print culture itself is
31. Dreyer, Tycho Brahe, 184 n. I. 32. Eisenstein, Printing Press, e.g., 159, 166-8, 609 n, 89-90, 702-3. See also Grafton, "Importance of Being Printed." The fact chac Eisenscein is simulcaneously coo provincial (chus missing che contingent elements of print culture by her lack of a comparacive perspeccive) and noc local enough (chus missing che work needed co make print culture at all) may be inferred from Cohen's discussion in Scientific Revolution, 357-67.

FIG.

1.7. Tycho Brahe's star catalogue, distributed in manuscript to princes and patrons. Note the careful imitation of a printed page. Reproduced from Norlind, Tycho Brahe, 297. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge Universiry Library.)

immediately laid open to analysis. It becomes a result of manifold representations, practices and conflicts, rather than just the monolithic cause with which we are often presented. 33 In contrast to talk ofa "print logic" imposed on humanity,34 this approach allows us to recover the construction ofdifferent print cultures in particular historical circumstances. It recognizes that texts, printed or not, cannot compel readers to react in specific ways, but that they must be interpreted in cultural spaces the character of which helps to decide what counts as a proper reading. In short, this recasting has the advantage of positioning the cultural and the social where they should be: at the center of our attention. IfTycho Brahe has hitherto been made the personification of print culture, then the experiences of his near-contemporary, Galileo Galilei, may in turn stand for this new approach. In 1610, Galileo produced the first of a series of dramatically successful books, called the Sidereus Nuncius. In vivid illustrations, he showed mountains and valleys on the surface of the Moon,
33. Compare the discussions of power in Latour, "On the Powers of Association," and Latour, "Technology Is Sociery Made Durable." This suggestion has obvious resonances with certain works in critical theory, such as Fish, Is There a Text in This Class? Since my aim is primarily historical I shall not be making many explicit links with such material, though the parallel deserves to be noted. Compare also McKenzie, Bibliography and the Sociology o/Texts. 34. E.g., Kernan, Printing Technology, Letters and SamuelJohmon, 48 ff.

INTRODUCTION

21

1.8. Iconic representation of the preservation and publication ofTycho Brahe's manuscripts. The four Holy Roman Emperors shown are Rudolf II, Ferdinand II, Ferdinand III, and Leopold 1. These respectively sponsored Tycho's writings (paravit), preserved and digested them into tables (usupavit-which could also mean "usurped"), recovered them from Kepler's family and saved them from damage during the Thirry Years' War (recepit), and published them (publicavit). The motto dedicates the book to the emperors as rulers of the two realms represented by the globes-exerting dominion over the terrestrial world politically, and over the celestial by possession of these manuscripts. The imperial message is reinforced by Ferdinand II's gesture towards Hercules, always a symbol of Hapsburg aspirations. Ironically, the double meaning of the term usupavit could well be apt: Curtius's manuscripts were actually very corrupt copies, which did Tycho's reputation no favors in the eyes of astronomers such as John Flamsteed. (Evans, Making of the Habsburg Monarchy, 332- 4; McDonald, "Maximilian I"; Ashworth, "Habsburg Circle"; Dreyer, Tycho Brahe, 371-4.) Curtius [L. Barrenus, pseud.], Historia Crrlestis. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge Universiry Library.)
FIG.

and the discovery of new stars in Orion and the Pleiades (fig. 1.9). These and other "nebulous" regions-the Milky Way in particular-could now be resolved into stars. Above all, however, Galileo revealed four previously unknown satellites revolving about Jupiter, providing a vivid model of Copernican cosmology. This discovery, embodied in a small book, would soon establish him as the foremost philosopher on the Italian peninsula. Yet it

FIG. 1.9. Illustrations of the lunar surface, from the first and three subsequent editions of Galileo Galilei's Sidereus Nuncius. These are perhaps the most famous of all early modern scientific illustrations. They were the first images to show the lunar surface, revealing it to be rough and cratered, and constituted an important element in the campaign to establish the imperfection of this heavenly body. It is especially striking, then, to note the transformations wrought on Galileo's images through their reproduction. Here, the first row (across) of pictures is GaliIeo's own, printed in his Venice edition of the Sidereus Nuncius (1610). The second comes from an unauthorized impression issued almost immediately in Frankfurt. Note that the sequence of the first two pictures has been reversed. Moreover, the exigencies of such unauthorized printing dictated speed and economy, and as a result changed the images themselves. As well as showing degradation in each picture, the first and fourth images of this impression were in fact printed from the same woodcut, rotated through 180°. The third

version reproduced here was issued in London in 1653. It reused the same blocks as the Frankfurt edition, again duplicating the first and fourth images. It also reiterated the sequence of the unauthorized version. So did the fourth version, printed in 1683. By this time the painstakingly crafted verisimilitude of Galileo's original drawings had been significantly eroded-a degradation in which the practices of piratical reproduction had played a large part. (top row) Galileo Galilei, Sidereus Nuncius (Venice, 1610). (second row) Galileo Galilei, Sidereus,

Nuncius [sic]
(Frankfurt, 1610). (third row) Galileo Galilei,

Sidereus Nuncius
(London, 2d ed., 1653).

(bottom row) Galileo Galilei, Sidereus Nuncius (London,
3d ed., 1683). (By permission of the Archives, California Institute of Technology.)

CHAPTER ONE

was not just for the intrinsic value of these observations that the Sidereus Nuncius had such an impact. In fact, Galileo and his allies deployed the book brilliantly to make its success. 35 He was angling to enter the court of an absolute prince, Cosimo II de' Medici, whose family had long been linked iconographically to Jupiter. Paying for the printing himself, Galileo named his new Jovian satellites accordingly. As the "Medicean stars" they formed the centerpiece of the book he now presented to the grand duke. It was not easy. Galileo actually had to change the name in mid-printing, after Medici officials told him that his original choice of "Cosmian" would not meet with approval; the new name was glued over the old on the pages already printed. He then went in person to make the presentation, ensuring that Cosimo would successfully see the new phenomena through his telescope. When Galileo distributed additional copies to princes and cardinals across Europe, along with spyglasses to support his claims, he did so under the carapace of Cosimo himself via the Medici diplomatic service. In promulgating the announcement, Galileo had presented Cosimo with heroic and noble homage, for which the conventions of patronage suggested an appropriate response. When that response came, Galileo declared that his whole "being" had been transformed. Perhaps for the first time, a mathematical practitioner underwent the transfiguration into court philosopher. 36 Galileo was trying to create a new kind of authority on, and for, natural knowledge. The construction of this persona and the elaboration ofhis work in cosmology and mechanics thus took place together, and both rested on the skillful exploitation of patronage dynamics at an absolutist court. The point is a rather subtle one. Patronage was not simply something that could be used as a tool to achieve aims defined by other, perhaps scientific, criteria. It helped constitute at once what were reasonable aims to adopt, what were good claims to make in pursuit of those aims, how they could best be made, and to which audiences. Evidence came into being and was accredited by means of the civil culture of the court. There was no "Galileo, scientist" standing outside this cultural realm and manipulating its mechanisms in order to achieve objective ends. It is important to appreciate this, since at each crucial moment of transition-from Venetian patronage to Florentine, and thence to papal-books were central to Galileo's advance. From the Sidereus Nuncius, so effective in raising him to Cosimo's court, to the
35. Galilei, Sidereus Nuncius (1989), 1-24, 87-II3; Biagioli, "Galileo's System of Patronage"; Westfall, "Science and Patronage." 36. Galilei, Sidereus Nuncius, 19, 90-1; Galilei, Opere, X, 353; Biagioli, Galileo, Courtier, chap. 2. John Dee did request the tide of Philosopher and Mathematician to Emperor Rudolf II before Galileo achieved his own elevation in Florence, but without success: Clulee, John Dee's Natural Philosophy, 224. Westman, "Astronomer's Role," is essential for understanding the significance of this transfiguration.

INTRODUCTION

25

Dialogo, which triggered his downfall at the hands of Pope Urban VIII's
Inquisition, books were key elements in any strategy to take advantage of patronage opportunities. 37 At court, what appear to modern eyes to be scientific disputes were seen by participant and spectator alike in these different terms. They would be triggered and structured by Galileo's patron for purposes of diversion and the expression of status. He was expected to produce entertaining and involving debates, and to challenge other court philosophers of sufficient rank. 38 While it was important not to lose such a dispute, it was also important to conduct it properly; and, as Tycho Brahe had known, regular challenges by qualified individuals were imperative to show that one's status was being recognized. So, for example, when the Medici ambassador presented a copy of the Sidereus Nuncius to imperial mathematician Johannes Kepler, he responded correctly with a printed reply dedicated not to Galileo, but to the ambassador. In a sense, Galileo was engaging with Kepler; but Cosimo was also communicating with the Holy Roman Emperor. 39 Unlike Tycho, however, Galileo had no private press. His book fell immediately into the hands of commercial printers. By late 16IO an unauthorized impression had appeared in Frankfurt, his fine illustrations marred by hasty reproduction. For the rest of the century these adulterated images would be reproduced repeatedly. Countless readers saw them-far more, in all likelihood, than ever came upon the authorized originals of what are probably the most momentous astronomical images of their era. 40 Even exempting such piratical enterprises, the social dynamics of challenges were modified by the unavoidable involvement of new personnel and places. The case of Galileo's 1623 work, II Saggiatore, is instructive in this respect. It was printed in April and May in a few hundred copies. In October the work was ritually presented to the pope and important cardinals. This was the courtly aspect of its production. But Galileo's allies also used the
37. For this portrayal I am indebted to Biagioli, Gali/eo, Courtier, esp. chaps. I, 2, 6. See also Eamon, "Court, Academy and Printing House"; Biagioli, "Galileo's System of Patronage." Some aspects of Biagioli's work-particularly his claim regarding the association between Cosimo and Jupiter-have been strenuously challenged by Shank, with results that remain inconclusive at the time of writing. The particular thrust of Shank's attack means that it does not directly impinge on my own argument. See especially Biagioli, "Playing with the Evidence," and Shank, "How Shall We Practice History?" 38. Biagioli, Gali/eo, Courtier, 163; Biagioli, "Galileo's System of Patronage," 30; Castiglione, Book ofthe Courtier, esp. 68 If. 39. Drake, Gali/eo Studies, 131-8. 40. Galilei, Sidereus Nuncius (Venice, 1610); Galilei, Sidereus, Nuncius [sic] (Frankfurt, 1610). It is perhaps worth adding the rider that the latter edition was unauthorized as far as anyone then or now has known; Galileo (like Isaac Newton later in the century) was quite capable of perpetrating his own "unauthorized" publications. The point remains that he was unable to oversee the production of the work, and in particular that of its illustrations.

26

CHAPTER ONE

book in what looks much more like a process of publication. They did so in order to expose the tactics of a Jesuit antagonist lurking behind the pseudonym of "Lotario Sarsi." They ensured that one of the licenser's copies was delivered early to the Sun bookshop. This was a well-known center for libertine literature, which the Jesuit would surely be monitoring for such works. Its proprietor had agreed to cooperate in the plan. Sure enough, "Sarsi" arrived and seized upon that very copy. He "changed color" on the spot, attacked the bookseller himself as personally responsible for the text, and left declaring loudly that he would take up the challenge and produce a rebuttal within three months. In so doing, he revealed himself as Orazio Grassi, lecturer in mathematics at the Collegio Romano and the Jesuits' most prestigious architect. The bookseller immediately told Galileo's allies of his outburst. Two of them wrote excitedly to their friend to tell him the news, whereupon Galileo came to Rome and successfully preempted Grassi's rebuttal. 41 Access to the bookshop, and the character of both the premises and its proprietor, had transformed the dispute. Here was something quite alien to Tycho's Uraniborg. For Galileo too, however, despite this success it was ultimately to prove an inauspicious development. In the events of his notorious fall not only the printers and booksellers, but the entire licensing and publication mechanism, would be implicated. The Saggiatore incident led directly to this far more significant affair. It began in 1623 with the election of Galileo's ally, Maffeo Barberini, as Pope Urban VIII. This was the spur for Galileo, becalmed in Florence, to seek a position of favor in Rome itself. He did so by using two tools: II Saggiatore itself, which he redirected at the last moment and presented to Urban, and his long-projected Copernican work on the tides. The first of these was a great success. After the incident at the Sun bookshop, Urban had it read to him at table, and seems to have relished its wit and rhetorical dexterity. He began to accord Galileo audiences, in which his favor seemed clear. So clear, in fact, that Galileo probably understood himself released from a private instruction issued some years earlier not to engage in public support for Copernicanism. He returned to Florence and began writing his greater work, which became the momentous Dialogo ... sopra i due Massimi

Sistemi del Mondo. The Dialogo was not immediately or obviously scandalous. In fact, it
successfully underwent an extensive licensing procedure, such that the
41. Galilei, Opere, XIII, 145-8; Galilei, Sidereus Nuncius, 94, 102; Redondi, Galileo: Heretic, 28-67, 179-83; Drake, Galileo at Work, 268-77, 279, 284-5, 287-8. It is perhaps worth

stressing that those involved in this plan probably knew "Sarsi's" actual identity throughout; the objective was to get an open declaration from Grassi of the fact, and of his future intentions.

INTRODUCTION

27

printed edition could boast as many as five imprimaturs. 42 Initially planned to appear in Rome in 1630, it was finally published only in 1632 in Florence. The book was in the event duly licensed in both cities, but nonetheless it caused a stir. Another of Galileo's Jesuit opponents, Christoph Scheiner, immediately repeated Grassi's error by revealing his outrage in front of the bookseller, who dutifully reported it back to his friends. 43 Murmurs soon spread that Galileo had violated Bellarmine's confidential instruction, which was rumored to ban him from even discussing the issue of Copernicanism, let alone supporting it. Events then moved very quickly. In April, Galileo's ally and patronage broker in Rome, Ciampoli, fell from grace, just as Urban came under stringent attack from Spanish interests for insufficient zeal in pursuing the Thirty Years' War and the struggle against heresy. This was a crucial development. Ciampoli was just the kind of intermediary needed by such a book to smooth its progress in courtly circles; he it was who had read If Saggiatore to Urban at table. Without such mediation the Dialogo would soon prove vulnerable, especially as the pope now associated its publication with Ciampoli's newly established impropriety. In these circumstances, what might otherwise have been appreciated as witty dialogic sallies came to be read very differently. Papal sensibilities took its barbs as personal affronts. That summer Urban called in the book, appointing a commission to investigate the circumstances of its appearance. In the autumn he transferred the case to the Inquisition. In February Galileo was summoned to Rome. From April until June negotiations continued in secret. The pope urged the Inquisition on, however, and Galileo was finally resolved to be "vehemently suspected of heresy"-one of the most serious offenses in the Inquisition's ambit. He was forced to abjure, and sentenced to permanent house arrest. 44 Sudden and irrevocable, Galileo's fall has remained one of the most resonant incidents in history, let alone in the history of science. Here, as throughout Galileo's life, the uses of a book had proved crucial to the transformation. This was no Tychonic success story. It would be difficult to identify fixity or immutability as important to the role of the Diafogo at any stage of its story. Galileo's fate was decided by different criteria. His fortunes, and in Mario Biagioli's terms perhaps even his identity, rested on the way in which his book would be read. As scholars working in the last two decades
42. Irs five licenses are reproduced in Galilei, Dialogue, [2]. For problems over printing and licensing, see Drake, GaMeo at Work, 3II-14, 319-20, 332-44, and Westfall, "Patronage and the Publication of Galileo's Dialogue," esp. 386-7, 393. 43. Galilei, Opere, XIV, 359-60. 44. Finocchiaro, GaMeo Affair, 32-9; Drake, GaMeo at Work, 344-52. After this chapter was written, Paula Findlen and Tara Nummedal kindly showed me their "Scientific Books in the Seventeenth Century," which includes an excellent discussion of Tycho, Galileo, and Kepler.

CHAPTER ONE

have revealed, Galileo was a fine mathematician, a profound philosopher, a superb rhetorician, a devious antagonist, and an agile courtier; but even he could not control such readers. 45
FROM FIXITY TO CREDIT

A new historical understanding of print is needed. What will it look like? One immediately evident feature will be its regard for the labors of those actually involved in printing, publishing, and reading. Another will be its respect for their own representations of printing, embracing both its prospects and its dangers. The dangers in particular will loom larger and more substantial than they have hitherto. Historians tend to disregard such perils as accidental; early modern readers and writers knew otherwise. They had good cause to fear that in the realm of print seemingly in prospect, authorial control over such efforts as Galileo's would be undermined. More than that, some of them thought that it was already undermined. Increasingly they articulated responses by which the culture of the learned gentleman could be saved from this "mechanick art." Perhaps we should remind ourselves of the extent to which those responses appeared to fail- of the extent to which the print culture of the eighteenth century could be perceived by contemporaries, not as a realization of the rationalizing effects now so often ascribed to the press, but as destabilizing and threatening to civility. Such a stance, artificial though it would be, might help us to distance ourselves from the apparent stability of our own print culture, with its uniform editions, mass reproduction, and typographical fixity. Early modern fears would then begin to appear not as incidental lapses, defined a priori as marginal, but as credible statements of experience. They would finally be recognized as no less substantial than the phenomenon of fixity itself. The Nature ofthe Book tries to treat all sides of the world of print with equal historiographical respect. In so doing, it inherits and attempts to develop initiatives central to the current state of cultural history. In particular, it reflects the important French field of histoire du livre. This field, at first associated with the Annales movement, has since the 1950S developed into an academic industry in its own right. 46 At the same time, its approaches
45. Biagioli, Cali/eo, Courtier, 2-3, 87. For the differenr aspects of Galileo cited here, see also Drake, Cali/eo at W0rk; Feyerabend, Against Method; Moss, Novelties in the Heavens; Wallace, Cali/eo j Logic ofDiscovery and Proof 46. Its origin is conventionally dated to the appearance in 1958 of Febvre and Martin's L'Apparition du Livre (which has appeared in English translation as The Coming ofthe Book). Perhaps its most ambitious recenr product has been Martin, History and Power of Writing. I have surveyed the field and its implications ar greater length in Johns, "Science and the Book."

INTRODUCTION

29

have changed substantially. Its original practitioners dedicated themselves to accounting for the effects of printing in terms of quantitative measures of manufacture and distribution. They divided up the realm of print by subject matter and by the social character of purchasers, hoping to arrive at objective indices of cultural change. In fact, fewer useful figures emerged than had been hoped for. But the approach, so representative of Annales historiography, nonetheless had-and still has-substantial advantages. Above all, it suited commonsense perceptions of what it is that most properly characterizes print: the large-scale reproduction and distriburion of precisely the same objects. Eisenstein's representation of print culture effectively embodies those same perceptions, albeit without the quantification. However, as illustrated by the examples of Galileo and Tycho, there were also costs to such a strategy. One was that it was effectively "indifferent to the objects themselves." It assumed that successive editions of a work were essentially the same, whatever their variations in text, format, or appearance. It would have accounted the Venice edition of Galileo's Sidereus Nuncius the same as the unauthorized Frankfurt impressionY Another, equally serious, disadvantage was that it remained silent about how the objects being counted were employed by readers such that they could have divergent cultural consequences. It could not have explained the different receptions accorded Galileo's Dialogo, because it ignored what Roger Chartier calls the "intellectual 'labor'" required to pur a book or paper to use. 48 Chartier himself has been central to efforts to address these costs. He has worked to recover the different modes of labor surrounding printed materials, revealing how readers in local settings could "appropriate" in different ways the books they read. From this perspective, ways of reading are recognized as "social and cultural practices." Like other such practices, they have a history, and one that can be reconstructed. The practical implications prove substantial. Sensitivity to the historical character of these practices often shows that an apparently authoritative text, however "fixed," could not compel uniformity in the cultures of its reception. In practice, rather the reverse seems to have happened. Local cultures created their own meanings with and for such objects. For example, during the Counter-Reformation, printed images issued in large numbers in an attempt to standardize religious practice instead frequently served as vehicles for continued differentiation. The elements of a printed book-its format, layout, and typographyacted as no more than elements in an instrument, the book itself, that was useful for constructing knowledge. They were the tools, among others, with
47. Chartier, "Postface," 624-5. Contrast Eisenstein, Printing Revolution, 21-2; Eisenstein, Printing Press, 80-9°, 103-4. 48. Chartier, Cultural History, 33-4.

JO

CHAPTER ONE

which users forged readings. In general, we may conclude that print entailed not one but many cultures, and that these cultures of the book were themselves local in character. 49 As the opening pages of this chapter implied, there was one concern in particular that possessed early modern readers, and that may be used as a key to the rest. Could a printed book be trusted to be what it claimed? Perhaps a reader would be prudent to reserve judgment. On the most obvious level, whether a Sidereus Nuncius printed in Frankfurt was really Galileo's text, or an Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica produced in N uremburg was really Tycho's, could justifiably be doubted. More broadly, the very apprehension that printed books might not be self-evidently creditable was enough to rule out any possibility of their bearing the power attributed to them by most modern historians. And that apprehension was widespread. Piracy and plagiarism occupied readers' minds just as prominently as fixity and enlightenment. Unauthorized translations, epitomes, imitations, and other varieties of "impropriety" were, they believed, routine hazards. Very few noteworthy publications seemed to escape altogether from such practices, and none at all could safely be regarded as immune a priori. It was regarded as extremely unusual for a book professing knowledge-from lowly almanacs to costly folios-to be published in the relatively unproblematic manner we now assume. Contemporaries had good reason to be wary. Their editions of Shakespeare, Donne, and Sir Thomas Browne were liable to be dubious. So were those of Robert Boyle, not to mention the first "scientific" journal, the Philosophical Transactions. Even Isaac Newton's Principia suffered from unauthorized reprinting. From Galileo and Tycho to Newton and John Flamsteed, no significant learned author seemed to escape the kinds of practices soon colloquially subsumed under the label of piracy. This meant that even when a book was not so treated, the possibility that it might be still permeated the negotiations, practices, and conventions by which it was made, distributed, exchanged, and used. If piracy was as widespread as commonly feared, then trusting any printed report without knowl49. These and similar points have been made in many contexts: Chartier, Order ofBooks, 16-17; Chartier, "Culture as Appropriation"; Chartier, "Publishing Strategies," 155-60; Chartier, "Practical Impact ofWriting," 122- 6; Chartier, Culture ofPrint, 1-5; Chartier, "Du Livre au Lire"; Chartier, Cultural Uses of Print, 3-12, 70; Chartier, Lectures et Lecteurs; Chartier, "Texts, Printings, Readings"; Chartier, Passions of the Renaissance, I-II, lIo-59, 326-61, 362-95; Bourdieu and Chartier, "La Lecture"; Martin, "Pour une Histoire de la Lecture"; de Certeau, "Reading as Poaching"; Damton, "History of Reading"; McKenzie, "Typography and Meaning"; McKenzie, Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts; Martin and Vezin, Mise en Page. On the specific theme of mise en page see also Laufer, "L'Espace Visuel du Livre Ancien"; Laufer, "Espaces du Livre"; Pastoureau, "L'Illustration du Livre." Compare also the fascinating discussion of "kitsch" in Clark, "Scientific Revolution in the German Nations," 97-8.

INTRODUCTION

31

edge of those processes could be rash. Profound problems of credit thus attended printed materials of all kinds. Without solutions there could be few meaningful uses for books-and perhaps no durable reasoning from them. It should not be surprising, then, that contemporaries did not always identify fixity as a central characteristic of print. Surveying the books available to aid ocean navigators, Edmond Halley, for one, noted that "the first Editions have generally been the best; frequent Copying most commonly vitiating the Originals." 50 Even when people did refer to enhanced reliability, it was often in the face of direct evidence to the contrary. Textual corruption of even such closely monitored texts as the Bible actually increased with the advent of print, due to various combinations of piracy and careless printingY The first book reputed to have been printed without any errors appeared only in 1760. Before then, variety was the rule, even within single editions. Martin Luther's German translation of Scripture was actually beaten into print by its first piracy, and in succeeding years the proportion of unauthorized to authorized texts was roughly ninety to one; these inclu,ded Luther's own translation, newly ascribed to others (including Catholics), and others' work reattributed to him. A century later, the first folio of Shakespeare boasted some six hundred different typefaces, along with nonuniform spelling and punctuation, erratic divisions and arrangement, mispaging, and irregular proofing. No two copies were identical. It is impossible to decide even that anyone is "typical." 52 In such a world, questions of credit took the place of assumptions of fixity. In attending to this issue, The Nature of the Book builds on Steven Shapin's identification of trust as a key element in the making of knowledge. 53 Where Shapin concentrates particularly on intersubjective trust, asking fundamental questions about whom one should believe, why, and in what circumstances, The Nature ofthe Book identifies a similar issue in the trust accorded to printed materials. It asks how readers decided what to believe. A central element in the reading of a printed work was likely to be a critical appraisal of its identity and its credit. Readers were not without resources for such an assessment. When they approached a given book, with them came knowledge about the purposes, status, and reliability of printed materials in general-knowledge they used to determine the appropriate kind and degree of faith to vest in this unfamiliar object. Yet here too they also brought to bear knowledge about kinds of people. Their worries about
50. Atlas Maritimus & Commercialis, i-iii. 51. Black, "Printed Bible." Eisenstein dismisses Black's argument our of hand: Printing Press,80.
p. Newman, "Word Made Print," 106 -7 and passim; de Grazia, Shakespeare Verbatim, 15-19,42; Kernan, Printing Technology, 48. 53. Shapin, Social History ofTruth; Schaffer, "Social Hisrory ofPlausibiliry," 129.

32

CHAPTER ONE

literary credit were often resolved, as a matter of everyday practice, into assessments of the people involved in the making, distribution, and reception of books. Readers worried about who decided what got into print, and about who controlled it once it was there. The twin problems of whom and what to credit were in practice often combined into one. When early modern readers determined a book not to be worthy of credit, they could do so on a number of grounds. It was in the attribution of "piracy," however, that the issues ofcredibility and print particularly converged. The term seems to have been coined by John Fell, bishop ofOxford, to describe the rapacious practices of London printers and booksellers. It had a technical meaning: a pirate was someone who indulged in the unauthorized reprinting of a title recognized to belong to someone else by the formal conventions of the printing and bookselling community. But it soon came to stand for a wide range of perceived transgressions of civility emanating from print's practitioners. As such, almost any book could, in principle, find itself accounted a piracy, whatever its actual circumstances of production and distribution. Historians of printing have therefore misconstrued instances of alleged piracy in at least two senses. First, they have seen piracy, like fixity, as inherent in the object, and not as a contestable attribution. Second, furthermore, they have assumed cases of piracy to be exceptions, accidental (in the philosophical sense of the word) to the essentially stabilizing character of print. Contemporaries were not so sure of this. Incidents that have been retrospectively dismissed as isolated and exceptional often seemed to them commonplace and representative. They might even be seen as attempts to undermine, and thereby to reform, the whole structure of the book trade. Even when conducted in more humdrum circumstances, moreover, and with less ambitious ends in sight, piracy still had powerful implications. Its apparent prevalence affected the economic and cultural conditions of all printed and written communication. It conditioned the accreditation of printed materials of all sorts, from the humblest ABC to the most elaborate encyclopedia. 54
54. An inspiration for this treatment, as for other aspects of this book, has come from medieval hisrory. Medievalists have devoted much attention to activities of "forgery" and "plagiarism." They have constructed a sophisticated historiography addressing the diversity of acts since subsumed under such labels, immersing the subject in a detailed and authoritative treatment of the cultural uses of writing and reading in general. Medieval "forgery" is appropriately seen as a form of truth-creation, justified (and perhaps even determined) by contemporary ideas about the nature and purposes of writing. It was also extraordinarily common. Perhaps half the documents known from Merovingian times are by our lights fake, and two-thirds of the documents known to have been issued to ecclesiastics before BOO would now be reckoned forgeries. See Grafton, Forgers and Critics, 24-5, 30-32; Clanchy, From Memory to Written Record, n8-20, 231-57; Stock, Implications o/Literacy, 59-87; Constable, "Forgery and Plagiarism." For a robust contrasting view, see Brown, "Falsitas pia sive Repre-

INTRODUCTION

33

For the learned, and for natural philosophers in particular, this had peculiarly important consequences. In the agonistic field ofearly modern natural knowledge, allegations of piracy readily shaded into charges of plagiarism. Such allegations therefore extended to the reputation of authors. That is, unauthorized printing threatened to "unauthorize" authors themselves. Even more important, it threatened the credibility to be attributed to their ideas. Like print itself, piracy therefore had epistemic as well as economic implications: it affected the structure and content of knowledge. For an enterprise like experimental philosophy, in particular, which depended implicitly on the trust accorded to the printed reports issued by its protagonists, the consequences threatened to be nothing short of devastating. The Nature ofthe Book provides the first extensive taxonomy of practices labeled piratical-from piracy itself, through abridgment, epitomizing, and translation, to plagiarism and libel. It not only traces the people, places, and practices through which books came into existence and were circulated. It also shows how allegations of impropriety in general, and of piracy in particular, emerged from the practices of the printing house and bookshop. It thus explains how and why such allegations gained their apparent ubiquity. Moreover, it then proceeds to ask how these changes could possibly be comprehended in terms of the polite civility supposed to guide intellectual conduct, and how claims that such practices had been pursued affected the reception of the works concerned. In short, it addresses precisely the epistemic significance of piracy. Printers and booksellers were manufacturers of credit. They had to be. The skills of those producing and trading in books, and the perceptions of those using them in learned work, might not intersect harmoniously. Whether or not they did at the moment of publication, moreover, accounts of printers' and booksellers' actions might still be drawn upon later by critics and rivals to challenge the value of any particular book, for example by alleging piracy. When they did succeed in remaining in the background-a rarer achievement than we might suppose- it was likely to be the result of hard and continuing work carried out "behind the scenes." A principal aim of The Nature ofthe Book is to recover this work and display its importance. While it mentions many instances in which publishing enterprises failed to proceed smoothly, then, its intent is not just to attest to the frequency of such failure. It instead substantiates Marc Bloch's dictum that "a good cataclysm suits our business." The historian, Bloch pointed out, often depends on "calamities" for the preservation and revelation of information, and this
hensibilis." For these medievalists' perspectives on print-which deserve more attention than they have received-see Clanchy, "Looking Back," and Rouse and Rouse, Authentic Witnesses, 449-66.

34

CHAPTER ONE

is no exception. 55 Problems and disputes were often the occasion for the creation of records documenting practices that remained unrecorded in cases of more successful publication. This volume is accordingly concerned to use such testimony to display the commonplace and unremarkable quite as much as the disastrous and spectacular; and especially to use the latter to reveal the former. The indispensable agency of printers and booksellers might remain unnoticed, for example, since the credit of their products depended on its being so. They themselves developed sophisticated ways of ensuring that they stayed just sufficiently in the background to avoid suspicion of either subterfuge or authorship. But in disputes the character of a bookseller or printer mattered. For readers attuned to its significance, anonymity itself might then become a source of suspicion. 56 Historians can put the resulting allegations to use as evidence. They need no longer be complicit in the cabal by their own silence. The ways in which such agents thought of and represented themselves were therefore of central importance to the received credit ofprinted knowledge. The point is not a simple one. What it was for a printer or bookseller to act "properly" could be determined in any number of ways. The principles of such propriety were consequently liable to vary. Yet it is impossible to understand impropriety without at the same time comprehending these, the conventions of propriety that were allegedly being violated. The two came into being in tandem. Chapter 3 thus addresses the ways in which printers and booksellers themselves fought to create a trustworthy realm of printed knowledge by articulating such conventions. The civility they adopted was complex, but it was also highly consequential. On its central concept of "propriety" rested the authorship of every writer who aspired to profess knowledge in print. Its maxims, reconstructed below, were important not just because of their use in resolving individual cases of piracy or unlicensed printing, but because they became central to the trade's representation of itself as a respectable craft. How printing should properly be practiced, in what ways it should properly be regulated - in effect, what printing itself was-would all be defined by reference to them. The epistemic significance of piracy therefore extended, reflexively, to printing itself: the very nature of print remained unresolved throughout the early modern period, and piracy was central to its resolution. From the practical regime described in chapter 3 emerged print culture itself. Chapters 4 and 5 trace how this happened. Chapter 4 tells the story of John Streater, a printer with a remarkably sophisticated republican philoso55. Bloch, Historian's Craft, 74-5· 56. For example, in his attacks on Ursus, Tycho Brahe was given ro remarking upon his antagonist's book's having been published without a printer's name, as was customary for "notorious libels": Jardine, Birth ofHistory and Philosophy ofScience, r6.

INTRODUCTION

35

phy. Streater's actions threatened to transform the nature ofprint and society simultaneously. His activities and interests ranged widely, from soldiering and arms dealing to natural magic and law reform. In particular, though, Streater tried to redefine the grounds of proper action for printers and booksellers by doing historical work of an extraordinarily ambitious sort. He rewrote the history of printing in an attempt to reconfigure its governing political culture and thereby redefine its current and future identity. The initiative was then inherited from Streater himself by others who pursued cognate goals through the eighteenth century. Chapter 5 examines their rivalries. It explains the new historical identities they forged for both print and its propriety. In fact, the use of historiographical work to create new identities and proprieties is an idee fixe of this book. It has become well known that scholarly figures attempted this kind of enterprise fairly frequently. So, however, did craftsmen and hacks. Joseph Moxon placed the press and the printer in a tradition of the mathematical sciences going back, through Tycho Brahe, to Vitruvius; chapter 2 describes his work. Streater and his ally, the embittered ex-Cavalier Richard Atkyns, told the history of printing as one of proto-industrial espionage. Sir Thomas Browne constructed a history of plagiarism, and Joseph Glanvill articulated a double-usurpation theory of ancient philosophy in order to criticize Aristotle and make room for the experimentalists of the Royal Society. These characters appear in chapter 7. Astronomer Royal John Flamsteed, the subject of chapter 8, went further still, and constructed three parallel histories: that of his own feud with Newton; that of Tycho's with Ursus (of which he thought the former was a recapitulation); and a full history ofastronomy from biblical times to the present, designed to culminate in its own appearance at the head of Flamsteed's great Historia Gelestis Britannica. Through these he tried to guide posterity to an understanding of his own proper identity. Each of these historiographical projects plays its part in the narrative that follows. I take such historical self-representation to be of central importance in constituting the identities agents felt themselves to possess, and hence in influencing their notions of proper action for their contemporaries too. The historiographical efforts recounted in chapter 5, in particular, led directly to the assumptions of reliability and credibility from which the print culture of the modern age arose. And the present work is of course no exception to this rule. The transformed history presented in The Nature ofthe Book is intended to encourage new thinking about the character of print in our own age. The sources of print culture are therefore to be sought in civility as much as in technology, and in historical labors as much as in immediate cause and effect. The "printing revolution," if there was one, consisted of changes in the conventions of handling and investing credit in textual materials, as

CHAPTER ONE

much as in transformations in their manufacture. The point deserves to be stressed explicitly. I do not question that print enabled the stabilization of texts, to some extent; although fixity was far rarer and harder to discern in early modern Europe than most modern historians assume. I do, however, question the character of the link between the two. Printed texts were not intrinsically trustworthy. When they were in fact trusted, it was only as a result of hard work. Fixity was in the eye of the beholder, and its recognition could not be maintained without continuing effort. At no point could it be counted on to reside irremissibly in the object itself, and it was always liable to contradiction. Those faced with using the press to create and sustain knowledge thus found themselves confronting a culture characterized by nothing so much as indeterminacy. If printing held no necessary bond to truth, neither did it show a necessary bond to falsity or corruption. Each link remained vulnerable to dispute. It is this epistemic indeterminacy that lends the history of the book its powerful impact on cultural history. Understanding how it could be overcome to make knowledge and hence cultural change is what the history of the book is for. There did exist strategies that could be adopted in order to secure as much credibility for printed objects as readers needed. Chapters 6 and 7 describe such strategies, as pursued by gentlemen and philosophers in a number of different settings. They argue that their pursuit was vital for the establishment of both new philosophies of nature and new practices of knowledge-making. A central tactic in most cases was that of attributing trust to a book on the basis of an evaluation of a person. Look closely at attributions of credit to printed materials, and, as already noted, there will generally be an attribution of credit to an individual involved. "It must be only by the Marks and Properties of an Imposture, that we can know an Imposture from that which is a real Truth, when attested unto us," counseled Humphrey Prideaux in a much-read analysis of the credibility of alleged scriptural writings. But in identifying such "marks" of imposture, attention should center on consideration of its maker and his conduct. If the producer seemed a wicked man, using "craft" and "fraud" to propagate a claim for his own interest, then that claim could justifiably be accounted a falsehood. 57 Prideaux's recommendation was conventional enough. Similar exhortations appeared in many works of his era. In action, these skills were therefore intriguingly recursive. Readers assigned credit to printed materials
57. Prideaux, True Nature ofImposture, "A Discourse for the Vindicating of Christianity from the Chatge ofImposcure," 6-8. For a fascinating and extremely suggestive treatment of early sttategies of credit adopted in an effort to circumvent piracy, see Newman, "Word Made Print." For bible printing and reading see also Cole, "Dynamics of Printing," and Tribble, Margins and Marginality, II-56.

INTRODUCTION

37

on the grounds of knowledge about their makers, which was in turn assessed pardy in terms of printed sources already accredited. In such ways might knowledge become more secure. But this was only one of many possible strategies. From the printing house and bookshop, through the craft center of Stationers' Hall, to the learned sites of the Royal Society of London and the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, The Nature ofthe Book identifies the techniques developed in each location by which books could be appraised and accredited. The use of print for making knowledge depended on these local practices of printing, exchange, and reading. The bookshop and printing house were regularly identified as places of promise and achievement. But they were also centers of conflict, plotting, and betrayal, where the proprietor could exhibit a notable fluidity of social identity. In anachronistic terms, he or she-the book trades were remarkable for the participation of both men and womenmerged the roles of socialite, friend, ally, entrepreneur, and even spy. His or her responsibility for the contents of a book seemed almost infinitely negotiable: however tactically unwise, outbursts such as those by Grassi and Scheiner against the bookseller were not intrinsically unreasonable. Hence the merging of trust in people with trust in things. Concerns over the effect of printing were readily expressed in terms of such practitioners. Bookshops represented points ofattraction for potential Brunos and Patrizis, it was said, in part because those who ran them were so inclined. They were also frighteningly good at their work. To flirt with anachronism once more, besides being manufacturers ofcredit, seventeenth-century booksellers were the best sociologists of literature of their day. The autonomy and creativity of Continental scholar-printers in these respects are well known. Eisenstein conjured an image of what she called "print-shops" as "'polyglot' households"-nodal points for the transfer of people, writings, and knowledge. The European "print-shop," she suggested, was where the "scholar" and the "craftsman" really met. 58 In some respects, and under certain circumstances, the smaller printing house or bookshop of London, Paris, or Rome could become a similar social site. Indeed, the household unit typically found here was perhaps rather more appropriate for such sociability than the relatively large operation of an EIzevir or a Plantin. But it also had to operate under more evident regulatory constraints. Eisenstein's view was that printers and booksellers were "natural" enemies to outside regulation of any kind. In fact, this was far from the case. In cities like London and Paris, the vast majority supported licensing
58. Eisenstein, Printing Press, 139, 399-400, 443-7, 520-2, 581-6°3, 653-4. Compare Zilsel, "Genesis of the Concept of Scientific Progress."

and similar regimes. They had good reason to do so. Those systems were deemed necessary to guarantee trust, order, and propriety in their craft. 59 Livelihoods therefore depended on them. A new understanding of these measures is needed. It must acknowledge their use to suppress texts ofwhich the state disapproved-a use that was certainly real, but that included publications discreditable for reasons of piracy as well as ofsedition or obscenity. But it must also appreciate the obverse of this function: the central role contemporaries ascribed to such systems in the maintenance of any trust at all in the realm of print. Printers were "mechanicks," as much in need of "licensing" as preachers (especially "mechanick" preachers) and medical practitioners (the analogue here being "empiricks"). For similar reasons, the book trades themselves participated in their own regulation. Some went further still. They proposed ways to change the very nature of the printing enterprise and to transform the character of its practitioners.
59. Eisenstein, Printing Press, 442. It is also significant that early modern images of the press showed a greater diversity than recognized by Eisenstein. Eisenstein shows only the complimentary iconography of Prosper Marchand ("The press descending from the heavens"); we need also to remember the devils chasing each other through the printing house portrayed in Huss's La Grante Dame Macabre, and broadsheets mocking those who believed anything produced by the press. Something ofthis iconographic range is reproduced in chapter 5 below. For an example of the importance of Catholic censorship in astronomy, see Gingerich, "Censorship of Copernicus."

Hevelius's "Civic Stellaeburg" in Danzig (now Gdansk). Hevelius's city building housed every device needed for an astronomer, from telescopes and lens-making equipment to a printing house. He sought to guarantee the credibility of his printed representations by doing all the corresponding activities, from observing to engraving, himself. His success was mixed. Still he needed imperial privileges to forbid other printers' "frauds"; and astronomers like John Flamsteed felt able to cast doubt on his accounts of these processes. Hevelius, Machina Gelestis. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)
FIG. 1.10.

There were ambitious attempts to establish a non-"mechanical" printing house for learned work, for example. In England the most notable such effort was Archbishop William Laud's at Oxford. Inherited by John Fell at the Restoration, Laud's initiative was eventually secured as Oxford University Press. GO The appointment of quasi-genteel "patentees" was, as chapters 3 and 4 show, an even more ambitious strategy to change the very nature of printing so as to eliminate problems of discredit. Patentees were wealthy printers or booksellers-or even gentlemen from outside the trade altogether-to whom the crown granted exclusive rights to key titles, or indeed to whole classes of publication. One patentee held the right to all law books, for example; another held that to all bibles. It was reckoned that they and their books would be securely trustworthy by virtue of their gentility and their dependence on royal favor. In the eyes of some, they could become a model for a future realm of print guaranteed by a decreed civility. Perhaps an urban equivalent to Tycho's civil press-or at least, to Hevelius's at Stellaeburg-could be constructed (fig. 1.10).
60. Ward, Oxford University Statutes, I, 205-6, declaring that an architypographus must be appointed so that "sordid and vulgar arrizans may not pervert the indulgence of that most clement prince [Charles I] to their own private lucre ... experience has shown [that] these mechanical artizans ... pay the least possible attention to calligraphy, or the beauty or elegance of the work, but thrust into publication any works, however rude and incorrect."

40

CHAPTER ONE

To the early modern world, then, the character of the printing house and the civil order in which printed books could be accorded trust were interdependent. Bookshops too were places encouraging novel interactions, as indeed were institutions such as the Royal Society. Throughout this book close attention is therefore accorded to the details ofsuch locations. Readers will be led down the darkest alleys of London, and guided through homes and workplaces to reveal their characters with an intimacy few early modern gentlemen can have shared. But here, it may be thought, crouches a paradox. Does the importance of print not lie precisely in its ability to transcend such local contexts and enable communication across wide distances? Sutely such a close focus on individual locations risks obscuring this, the most consequential issue of all. It is a real question, with implications beyond the understanding of print alone. The next section addresses this apparent paradox, and from a correspondingly broad perspective. For a central theme of The Nature ofthe Book is to see this power to transcend place as something itself in need of explanation.
PLACE, PRACTICE, AND KNOWLEDGE

Books are a load of crap. PHILIP LARKIN, "A Study of Reading Habits," Collected Poems,

131

The Nature ofthe Book concentrates for the most part on one country, England, and in particular on its capital city, London. 61 The focus is by no means exclusive, and in fact discussion does extend across Europe as appropriate. Nevertheless, the question must arise: why? The choice may appear arbitrary. More to the point, it may seem perverse to address questions of the identity and consequences of print by examining anyone location, when the very essence of print, supposedly, is that it enables human beings to transcend their immediate circumstances and communicate reliably with others in different times and places. These are important questions. One plausible answer to the first derives from the extensive attention that historians have directed at the emergence of polite commerce in Augustan England. 62 As part of this, England became one of the earliest nations to de61. Strictly speaking, from the early eighteenth century Britain succeeded England as the political entity in question. Since my discussion covers a long period before union, and in any case concentrates on the region around London, I have generally referred to England here. The issue of national identity was a charged one, however, as has been brought to the fore in such recent studies as Colley, Britons; Russell, Fall of the British Monarchies; and Morrill, Nature ofthe English Revolution, 91-II7. 62. The most recent and comprehensive survey is the massive three-volume series formed by Brewer and Porter, Consumption and the World ofGoods; Bermingham and Brewer, Consumption ofCulture; and Brewer and Staves, Early Modern Conceptions ofProperty.

INTRODUCTION

velop a sophisticated commercial culture of printing and publishing, and its concepts of authorship, liberty of the press, and intellectual property have been of influence across the world. It warrants attention for that reason alone. But a further justification may also be advanced-one that addresses the more fundamental question of why it is appropriate to focus on anyone location at all. This book concentrates on the implications of printing for knowledge, and for knowledge of nature in particular, for reasons already outlined. It does so at what was undeniably a time of extraordinary creativity in the history of science. Early modern England witnessed not only the invention of experimental philosophy and the advent of the Royal Society, but the achievements of such figures as Francis Bacon, William Harvey, Robert Boyle, and Isaac Newton. The Nature ofthe Book aspires to address some of our founding assumptions about how such successes were attained. To do so, it concurs with much current work in the history of science in relating knowledge to its particular social and cultural settings. The universality of science, such work suggests, is an achievement realized only through much hard work. That work is necessarily specific to its particular sites, be they medieval universities, Renaissance courts, or Victorian laboratories. 63 Such are the places that have harbored the kind ofskilled practices through which knowledge has been created and sustained. From this perspective, museums, laboratories, and royal palaces are seen as not just architectural structures, but distinct social spaces generating different practices fertile of new knowledge. 64 The knowledge fashioned in such places answers the needs of the moment, addresses the questions of the time, and satisfies the standards of the local culture. For the historian, print and science share a rather intimidating characteristic. Both appear to transcend place. Scientific knowledge, it has been asserted, is by its very nature true wherever one may find oneself. That is what constitutes its claim to objectivity.65 Print seems blessed by a similar
63. See especially: Shapin, "House of Experiment"; Biagioli, Gali/eo, Courtier; Hannaway, "Laboratory Design"; Wesrman, "Astronomer's Role"; Ophir, Shapin, and Schaffer, Place ofKnowledge; Outram, "New Spaces in Natural History"; Moran, Alchemical World of the German Court; Smith and Agar, Making Spacefor Science. For the importance oflocalization in the history of the "scientific revolution," see also Porter and Teich, Scientific Revolution in National Context, and Schuster, "Scientific Revolution," 223-4. Jardine's Scenes ofInquiry lucidly explains the philosophical issues at stake. 64. De Certeau, Practice ofEveryday Life, Il7. Elias's treatment of the royal court, for instance, illustrates how it merged family and government in a coherent figuration: Elias, Court Society, I, 41-65; Foucault, "Space, Knowledge, and Power." 65. Ophir and Shapin, "Place of Knowledge," 3-4; Porter, Trust in Numbers, 217-9 (which notes the widely cited certificate ofscience's universality, that "the same textbooks can be used all over the world"); Johns, "Ideal of Scientific Collaboration."

CHAPTER ONE

transcendence: in many historians' hands, it appears to hint at something floating apart from specific, compromised, adulterated actuality. Just as appreciations of science have too often eschewed attention to the detailed intricacy of knowledge in the making, so cultural historians' appreciation of print has too frequently stopped short at the doors of the printing house. 66 But if the universal character ofscience can be appraised as an achievement, warranted and maintained by situated labors, may the same not be true of print? The suggestion is at the core of this book's approach. Searching for print culture in the making, we actually zero in not just on London, but on particular streets, buildings, floors, and rooms. We shall try to recover the identities, representations, and practices of the people who lived and worked in those rooms. And we shall see how hard they worked to create the realm of print, in a complex and unforgiving web of such domains. The close attention paid by The Nature ofthe Book to the intricate details of individuals' practices, characters, and motivations, far from being peripheral, is thus essential. Such a focus must be adopted in order to show how print, like scientific truth, attains the level of universality-by the hard, continuous work of real people in real places. This makes the conjunction of the history of print with that of science especially intriguing. The juxtaposition becomes only more curious when one recalls the enormous-perhaps even defining-role that historians have almost unconsciously ascribed to print in the history of science. That history is routinely represented in terms of a chronological skeleton, the joints of which are dates such as 1543, 1632, 1687, 1789, 1859, and 1905.67 These years are etched in the memory of every historian of science with a permanence no others can match. They seem ineluctable. Novel historiographical approaches leave them unscathed. And all, of course, are publication dates, ranging from Copernicus's De Revolutionihus (and Vesalius's De Humani Corporis Fabrica) to Einstein's revolutionary paper introducing special relativity. To that extent, the history of print and that of science are tacitly acknowledged to coincide. Yet, strangely, recent historiography has implicitly directed attention away from the conjunction. The reason for this apparent paradox is subtle, and even rather profound. There is a sense in which the history of early modern science no longer exists. Historians now employ all the resources of cultural and social histo66. This could not be said of bibliographers, but then these have often been too modest in their historiographical objectives. Historians of the book such as Henri-Jean Martin are a more consequential exception, for which see above, pp. 28-30. 67. The dares,of Copernicus's De Revolutionibus, Galileo's Dialago, Newton's Principia, Lavoisier's Trait! Elbnentaire de Chimie, Darwin's Origin ofSpecies, and Einstein's "Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Korper" respectively.

INTRODUCTION

43

riography in an attempt to explain why people made certain claims in certain circumstances, and why they were or were not believed; whether or not such claims are, to modern eyes, "scientific" has ceased to seem so important. Indeed, although the early modern world recognized something it called "science" (or, more likely, the Latin scientia)-namely, the kind of demonstrative knowledge produced by geometers or infallible logiciansit did not acknowledge anything like the modern enterprise. And it certainly did not harbor any scientists. 68 The consequences of accepting this prove substantial. The extent ofacceptable topics has widened enormously. Movements previously assumed peripheral-Jesuit philosophy, for example, or, perhaps most spectacularly, hermeticism- have been reassessed as powerful and authoritative in their particular settings. More canonical subjects have also been transformed. Experimental philosophy and Newtonianism, in particular, are no longer seen as gaining straightforward victories over selfevidently inferior opposition. On the contrary, they are seen as struggling for credibility in a cultural bazaar filled with more different candidates for natural knowledge than had ever existed before, offering greater potential rewards. Their proponents' strategies must accordingly be understood as developing in response to these formidable and effective opponents. As they did so, they themselves diverged; it is difficult now to identify anyone thing to call "Newtonianism." An appreciation of the viability of alternatives has thus had enriching implications for our understanding of the canonical successes of the "scientific revolution" toO. 69 But this appreciation of a far wider range of places and practices has also had its costs. If natural knowledge was such a localized thing, then the processes by which it came to be transferred from place to place become rather mysterious. Talk of diffusion or dissemination will not now pass muster. The evocation of an all-powerful central source from which influence spreads across an inert terrain is no longer tenable, because sites of reception previously supposed passive are now recognized to have been vital, dynamic, and appropriative. Notions of "popularization" become equally problematic, since they too generally posit audiences as passive receptacles of influence rather than positive agents of appropriation. 70 With respect to
68. For the origins of the latter term see [Whewell], review of Sommerville's On the Con-

nexion ofthe Physical Sciences, 58 - 60, and Ross, "Scientist," 71-5.
69. Dear, "Jesuit Mathematical Science"; Henry and Hutton, New Perspectives; Hannaway, Chemists and the WOrd; Webster, From Paracelsus to Newton; Schaffer, "Newtonianism." For other rehabilitations see Feingold, Mathematician's Apprenticeship; Gascoigne, "Universities and the Scientific Revolution"; Gascoigne, "Reappraisal of the Role of the Universities"; Feldhay, "Knowledge and Salvation"; Feldhay and Elkana, After Merton. 70. An excellent alternative is presented by Secord, "Science in the Pub." See also Latour, Science in Action, 132- 44.

44

CHAPTER ONE

knowledge based in experiments the problem is especially evident. The transfer of this particular species of practical, performative knowledge to different sites could never be straightforward, if only because the replication of the localized skills in which such knowledge was based proved riddled with difficulties. Early modern experimentalists knew this all too well; it has only recently been rediscovered by historians. But what was most flagrantly true for experimental knowledge was also true, if less obviously, for other claims to epistemic authority. Here lies another reason to focus on England. In London, the Royal Society (chartered in 1662) pioneered solutions to these intractable problems. In part it did so by aggressive intervention in the realm of print. A long-term consequence was a transformation in both print and natural knowledge. Indeed, one of the most interesting and unusual aspects of Restoration experimental philosophy was that it explicitly confronted this situation. Robert Boyle and his colleagues at the Society recognized it remarkably early, and advanced notably cogent solutions. One aspect of their responses is well known, and has been extensively analyzed oflate. For all its difficulty of achievement, experimental philosophers appealed to replicability as testament to the truth of the knowledge they professed. In one sense, that very difficulty was an asset: it helped make successful repetition in different cultutal settings a robust criterion of truth. The result was a claim about replication that has become central to the authority of modern science. But the character of the obstacle to replication also deserves note. As has become well known, successful repetition of an experiment elsewhere often required the transfer of more than just written or printed materials alone. Extensive social contact berween practitioners was needed in order to reproduce cultural skills and settings in a new site. A skilled practitioner might even have to travel in person between the two locations in order for the attempted replication to succeed-or, for that matter, for it definitively to fail. It thus seems that nobody in 1660s Europe built an air-pump successfully by relying solely on Boyle's textual description of the engine. Some, we know, tried; all, we think, failed.?l A key assertion of the sociology of knowledge has been that this is true not just in practice, but in something approaching principle. Experimental knowledge of the kind sought by Restoration natural philosophers must necessarily be founded in skills, the character and application of which can never be stipulated exhaustively by written rules. Replication requires the recreation of a performative and interpretative culture in which candidate attempts can be conducted. Building new air-pumps could indeed be done
71. Shapin and Schaffer, Leviathan and the Air-Pump, 229-30, 235.

INTRODUCTION

45

from recipe-like textual instructions, but only if interpreted in a shared recipe-reading culture. That is one reason why such knowledge seems to be inescapably social: it depends on the face-to-face interactions that help constitute such a culture.nlt is also why some historians ofscience have directed their attention away from what they think of as "texts." These are not, they suppose, the prime building blocks of either society or knowledge. Yet there must be more to say about the importance for the construction of natural knowledge of the construction of print. Early modern natural philosophers did make and use a variety of written, printed, and engraved objects. They labored over books, periodicals, letters, "schemes," and any number of similar textual and pictorial materials. They expended very large amounts of time and money doing so-larger, as chapter 7 will show, even than those expended on experimental instruments like the air-pump. Even the most basic historicist sensibility is likely to rebel at the thought that all this activity was intrinsically futile. In fact, it is possible to argue that it was central to enterprises dedicated to making knowledge-even experimental ones. Several historians have already noted that experiments often did not, in fact, need to be replicated at all. Rhetoric helped.?3 Boyle and his interlocutors developed sophisticated and prolix ways of writing reports of their experimental trials. By stating explicitly every circumstance of the experimental scene, a report sufficiently crammed with detail could aspire to persuade distant readers that they had as good as been there themselves. In that event, they effectively became "virtual witnesses" to the experiment itself. Such virtual witnessing could thereby render the actual practice of replication largely otiose. The skills of an experimenter may indeed have demanded complex cultural modes of transfer and appropriation, then, in which texts were not omnipotent (fig. 1.11). But if "texts" were ineffective for transmitting manual skills, more tangible objects could be put to use to mediate the creation of consensus by means of recruiting readers. Books, periodicals, papers, letters, maps, graphs, and diagrams did move back and forth between sites, proving extremely useful tools for the making and maintenance of knowledge. Rhetoric, however persuasive, came into being and achieved its effects only when incarnated in such objects. Historians of science need
72. Collins, Changing Order, 55-7, 70-]3, 77; Gooding, Pinch, and Schaffer, Uses of Experiment, 10-13; Lynch, Scientific Practice and Ordinary Action, 211-4. Compare Law-

rence, "Incommunicable Knowledge," for tacit knowledge in the history of medicine. Eamon, Science and the Secrets ofNature, is the most recent work to concentrate on recipelike texts: see esp. 130-33. 73. Dear, "Totius in Verba"; Dear, Literary Structure; Gross, "Rhetorical Invention"; Bazerman, Shaping Written Knowledge; Moss, Novelties. For "virtual witnessing," see Shapin, "Pump and Circumstance," and Shapin and Schaffer, Leviathan and the Air-Pump, 22-79.

CHAPTER ONE

FIG. LII.

Reading skills juxtaposed with experimental dexterity. David Ryckaert III, The

Alchemist (1648). (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

to begin considering in detail their processes of manufacture, distribution, and use,?4 Use in particular is important here. It raises rather a subtle issue, hinted at in general above bur now requiring explicit attention. Almost all historians put themselves in the place of early modern readers and assume that their own act of reading replicates that of their historical counterparts. But this substitution may not be entirely innocuous,?5 A rather different approach is suggested ifone identifies reading itselfas a skill, just as historically specific as the more obvious dexterity involved in experimentation. If reading has a history, then assuming that modern readers' responses to a printed page accurately reproduce those of seventeenth-century men and women becomes problematic. Attendance to the conventions constraining the appropriation of printed objects in particular historical settings seems much more pertinent. Agreement across cultural spaces arose out of the exercise of such reading skills. Rhetoric, however expert, depended on them. The ques74. There are exceptions. Golinski, Science as Public Culture, and Stewart, Rise a/Public Science, largely escape this charge by paying close attention to contexts of use. 75. Chartier, Pratiques de La Lecture, 7; Chartier, Cultural History, 40.

INTRODUCTION

47

tions addressed in The Nature ofthe Book are of a correspondingly specific order: of how an experimental paper was actually composed by this writer, made by these workmen, distributed by these merchants and diplomats, and discussed in these ways, by these people, here, in these circumstances, with these results. This very minuteness of focus enables it to trace a grand process: the elaboration of a print culture and a culture of natural knowledge in tandem,76 Chapter 6 pursues this specificity to its most intimate level. It examines how early modern people represented reading itself, in terms of their very minds and bodies.?? Directing attention to the human frame, it asks how readers sought to understand their experiences in terms of its "passions." The implications of their quest extended very widely indeed: from the fortunes of Protestantism to the transmutation of metals, and from the education of gentlemen to the development of women's authorship. It also impinged directly upon their responses to Creation. Investigating the "book of nature" was thus a profoundly reflexive process: early modern people arrived at natural knowledge through reading, a skill that they in turn understood in terms of the natural knowledge so gained,78 Recognition of the ineffable character of skill thus need not imply that print is a peripheral subject for the historian of science. On the contrary, in the future we shall need to marry the two. The history of reading suggests one way to do so. The salience of printed books and papers cannot now simply be exorcised by alleging the inability of texts to determine their readers' conclusions; that they were unable to force concurrence does not
76. Gingerich and Westman are among the few historians of Renaissance science to have consistently attended to the entire history of books, from writing to reading: e.g., Gingerich, "Copernicus's De Revolutionibus"; Gingerich, "Censorship of Copernicus"; Westman, "Proof, Poetics, and Patronage"; Westman, "Reception ofGalileo's Dialogue"; Gingerich and Westman, Wittich Connection. William Eamon, although his work centers on books, does not generally venture into such details: see especially his Science and the Secrets o/Nature, and also his "Books of Secrets"; "Arcana Disclosed"; "From the Secrets of Nature to Public Knowledge"; "Court, Academy and Printing House." Rostenberg's Library o/Robert Hooke is another recent exception to the rule, but one riddled with errors. 77. See also Johns, "Physiology of Reading in Restoration England" and "Physiology of Reading and the Anatomy of Enthusiasm." 78. Shapin, Social History o/Truth, xviii-xix. For rhe image of rhe Book of Nature, see Eisenstein, Printing Revolution, 455 - 6, 471- 8; Brooke, Science and Religion, 75 - 81; Blumenberg, Lesbarkeit tier Welt; Findlen, Possessing Nature, 55 - 63 (much the most interesting recent set of remarks on the subject in English); Dingley, Vox ClEli, sigs. [A5']-[A6']. For shifts in the modern significance of the metaphor, see also Traweek, Beamtimes and Lifetimes, 160-1. Nehemiah Grew referred to John Wilkins holding the Bible in one hand and Grew's own book-some pages from the book of nature-in the other, as a commentary on the first, "by which, in part God reads the World his own Definition, and their Duty to him": Grew, Anatomy o/Vegetables Begun, sigs. A4'-[A7'].

CHAPTER ONE

mean that such objects were not interpreted at all. The reading of a book is no less skillful, and no less local, than the conducting of an experiment.?9 To understand the transformation of science into an apparently universal culture, then, we need to create a history of the reading practices surrounding scientific books as detailed and intricate as the appreciation we already have of the experimental practices surrounding scientific instruments. The Nature ofthe Book marks the beginning of that enterprise.
NATURAL KNOWLEDGE IN ENGLAND: WISDOM IN THE CONCOURSE

Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the streets: She ctieth in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth her words, saying, How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof ... But ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity ... For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. PROVERBS I: 20-32

Translating the experiences of Galileo and Tycho into the rather different situation of late Renaissance England is not a straightforward task. The courts of Elizabeth, James I, and Charles I never attained the culture of absolutism surrounding those of Rudolf or Cosimo- much though they may have tried-and there was no official court philosopher here. 80 Yet in some ways English natural philosophy disputes were modeled on such Continental forms. Books and manuscripts played just as central a role in English courtly life, and percipient historians have noted the extent to which those presented at court might be assumed to bear the patron's authorship.8l Nor did this courtly role end with the Civil War. As we shall see in chapter 8, as late as 1712 not one of the four hundred copies printed of John Flamsteed's
79. See especially Chartier, "Culture as Appropriation"; Charrier, Pratiques de fa Lecture; Chartier, Lectures et Lecteurs; Charrier, "Texts, Printings, Readings"; Chartier, Passions ofthe Renaissance, I-II, 110-59, 326-61, 362-95; Marrin, "Pour une Histoire de la Lecture"; de Cerreau, Practice ofEveryday Life, 165-76; Cressy, Literacy and the Social Order, 1-18; Darnton, "History of Reading." 80. The nearest equivalent was John Dee, as attested in the possibly sarcastic remarks of real courtiers: Sherman, john Dee, 7-8; Roberts and Watson, john Dee's Library Catalogue. See also above, note 36. Compare Harriot, who made similar observations to Galileo's but was unable to make them count: Jacquot, "Thomas Harriot's Reputation"; Henry, "Thomas Harriot and Atomism"; Cormack, "Twisting the Lion's Tail." 81. Goldberg,James I and the Politics ofLiterature, e.g., 1-9. James I had visited Uraniborg itself: Thoren, Lord ofUraniborg, 334-5; Brahe, Opera, II, 11-12.

INTRODUCTION

49

Historia Ca'lestis-the greatest work of observational astronomy then in existence-seems actually to have been sold, but volumes were distributed through diplomatic channels across Europe and as far as Muscovy. Flamsteed, like Tycho in Prague, held the title of royal astronomer, and chapter 8 will show the extent to which he modeled every aspect of his conduct on Tycho's. But the difference between English and imperial natural knowledge may be measured by his failure. Although his observatory on Greenwich Hill more than matched his predecessor's Uraniborg for the accuracy of its instruments, Flamsteed had no private printing house. For him, the consequences were to prove calamitous. In England, there was no noble Tycho Brahe able to boast his own autonomous printing operation. There was no way in which the production of learned books could be taken out of commercial hands. Philosophers could not hope to emulate Tycho's success-partial and compromised though even that success was-because they had to live and work in an environment of city and court in juxtaposition. They had to reconcile civility with commerce. They had to utter their wisdom in the streets of London, where its reception would be far from secure. The first thing to appreciate about the articulation and reception of natural knowledge in early modern England is its insecurity. The achievements of the Royal Society were consequently but one element in a continuing history of attempts to discipline print and render it a sound platform for building a godly nation. That history included the development of vital and lasting new concepts of authorship, publication, and reading. A series of proposals for the reform of knowledge and its circulation grappled with this situation. Most influential were the ambitious schemes put fOlWard by James I's lord chancellor, Sir Francis Bacon. Bacon's identification of a trinity of transforming inventions-compass, gunpowder, and press-is, of course, famous. It is often assumed from this proclamation that Bacon recommended the open printing and publication of knowledge to aid in its advancement. Yet this is a misapprehension. Bacon in fact represented the printing press as a prime example of how inventions should not be sought. He believed that there was "nothing in the art of printing which is not plain and obvious." Speaking to Queen Elizabeth through the personified figure of Natural Philosophy, he called the press "a gross invention," which had been not so much invented as "stumbled upon and lighted on by chaunce." 82 And he certainly did not recommend unrestricted publication of knowledge, urging rather its retention within a tiny community of
82. Martin, '''Knowledge Is Power,'" 97-I03; Martin, Francis Bacon, 64-8; Bacon, Works, IV; IOO, 113-5. However, in the New Atlantis the (anonymous) inventor of printing did merit a statue in the gallery of inventors: ibid., III, 165-6.

5°

CHAPTER ONE

royal licentiates. Both opinions derived from his view of the purpose and organization of knowledge. Bacon aimed to make natural philosophy a sector of the state. Regarding himself primarily as a statesman and royal counselor, he wished to establish an administrative mechanism for generating natural knowledge that would best serve the advancement of the crown. The best natural philosopher, in this vision, would be the best state official. His greatest targets in proposing this scheme were thus what he called "voluntaries": individuals who claimed a right to profess knowledge independent of the state's bureaucracy.83 In order to eradicate such dangerous knowledgepeddlers, it would be necessary to "purge the floors of men's understandings," and to replace their independent notions with rigid, unified rules of operation. "The business," he decreed, "must be done as if by machinery." The press was the exception that proved this rather daunting rule. It was a device discovered by chance, and by disorganized artisans. Yet it had prospered, and the commonwealth had profited by its success. Or had it? True, there were many new books to be read; but this did not mean that they conveyed any more genuine knowledge. Bacon urged that his bureaucracy create new editions of classic authors, "with more correct impressions, more faithful translations, more profitable glosses, more diligent annotations," the implication being that the creations of the press were at present profoundly unsatisfactory. Besides, open printing encouraged dangerous ambitions. Bacon therefore insisted that his own proposals be known only to "some fit and selected minds," and that the knowledge produced by his state machinery be similarly guarded. In the New Atlantis, his grand vision ofa political state founded on natural knowledge, the personnel of Solomon's House were required to take an oath of secrecy. Only three selected individuals were allowed to be "Interpreters of Nature." The governors would authorize only approved conclusions to be made public on their periodic "circuits." And the deep knowledge on which their useful promulgations were based would never be revealed at all. 84 A problem of authorship thus coincided with that of knowledge. In Bacon's era, ambitious treatises of natural knowledge were being written by an unprecedented multiplicity ofwriters: not only royal counselors, but lawyers (like Bacon himself, and later Sir Matthew Hale), mathematical practitioners (like Robert Recorde, Sir Henry Billingsley, Robert Norman, and Thomas Digges), university scholars (like Nathaniel Carpenter and John Wallis), churchmen (like John Wilkins and Seth Ward), and physicians (like William Harvey, William Gilbert, and Robert Fludd). Soon women like Margaret Cavendish would be added to their number. What was their claim
83. Martin, Francis Bacon, 56-63, 121-6, 150, 163, 173. 84. Bacon, Works, III, 165-6, 323-5; Martin, Francis Bacon, 149-51, 163-4. Contrast the portrayal in Elsky, Authorizing Wordr, 200 - 4.

INTRODUCTION

to legitimacy in so acting? How were their arguments properly to be resolved? Ironically, all claimed to offer unity and an end to the discord inspired by the very proliferation of voluntaries in which they themselves participated. Even natural magicians, conventionally identified as the worst of voluntaries, tried to establish their credentials as bringers oforder by waxing indignant at the "cavilling, brabling" and seditious scholastics. 85 Whether expressed as ridicule or hostility, opposition to illegitimate authorship became a pervasive feature of English writing on the natural world. Bacon's was a forthright statement of one ideal for the determination of disputes in natural knowledge. It effectively envisaged an English social equivalent ofUraniborg. All practitioners must be licensed by court officers, resolution of arguments must be centralized and decisive, word of the debates must be restricted to the central legislators, and there must be no publication to the populace without central approval. Printing, dispersal, and reading of books were to be monitored by a privileged elite according to its civil conventions. For a Jacobean counselor it was a tempting prospect. And it would be repeated in various forms by successive systematizers later in the century. Gabriel Plattes's proposed state "Laboratory," for example, would admit only someone prepared to stay inside "till he be brought forth to go to the Church to be buried." Even this seemed mild compared to Macaria, where anyone dispersing unlicensed opinion would, quite simply, be executed. 86 ' But although Tychonic isolation was tempting, it was not achievable. Courtly aspirations notwithstanding, in England there would always be other printers, booksellers, writers, and readers at work. The fact was that book dispersal did not operate entirely through diplomatic and courtly channels. There was a national and international book trade, and before long even books directed at restricted audiences- including, as already observed, both Tycho's and Galileo's-participated in it. Courts were continuously being reminded of the unpredictability (and worse) that could result, and again England's was no exception. If the propriety of disputes was that of the court-or, for that matter, the university-then the very involvement of the book trade introduced an important new element. It was not necessarily disastrous; Galileo, after all, embraced this realm for a while with
85. For a particularly insistent example see Fludd, Mosaicall Philosophy. Fludd raised the denial of controversy into an ontological principle, insisting that all apparent contrariety in the natural world must be referred to the undivided action of God; the quarrels ofscholastics, he thought, corresponded to their idolatrous respect for natural oppositions such as antipathies. 86. Plattes, "Caveat for Alchymists," 87; [Plattes]' Description ofthe famous Kingdome of Macaria, sig. B2' (contrast the misleading impression given in Eisenstein, Printing Press, 305, which is often repeated by historians). Winstanley made preaching for hire one of the few capital offenses in an ideal society: Hill, Turbulent, Seditious and Factious People, 338.

CHAPTER ONE

creativity and skill. But it was definitely threatening. Printing and bookselling were concentrated almost exclusively in the vast social morass of London, a city represented by most courtiers and scholars as incipiently rebellious and fascinatingly venal. As would-be authors complained, Wisdom might find as heedless an audience in these streets as in those of Old Testament timesY Philosophers would be forced to see the problem with particularly stark clarity. We cannot say how Galileo would have fared had he been an Englishman. The nearest equivalent to his struggles in Rome and Florence, however, was a controversy over Copernicanism and related issues that occurred in 1634 - 46 between Alexander Ross and John Wilkins. Wilkins indeed took the Sidereus Nuncius as his model, reproducing one of its images of the Moon. 88 But the differences between the two cases are as revealing as the similarities. There was scant trace in this dispute ofTycho's sterilized way of printing and distributing texts, and of Galileo's recourse to court convenand was displayed in the shop tions. Wilkins's initial tract was of the most incendiary Puritan bookseller in London, Michael Sparke, who had earlier introduced Tycho himself to the London public in the guise of a Protestant millenarian prophet (fig. 1.12).89 Sparke's was the most prominent name on the title page. His notoriety, like that of Galileo's bookseller in Rome, fueled the conflict. Ross did attempt to use the issue for preferment in the church, but with minimal success. He ended up a bookseller's hack, churning out pedantic diatribes against every original thinker of the time. Neither writer managed to gain an audience at court, if that was their aim. In a sense, neither achieved authorship at all. The aspiration to authorship, however, stood at the center ofthe WilkinsRoss dispute, just as it had of Bacon's concerns. It was expressed as a mutual repudiation of the illegitimate "singularity" displayed by those who boasted, not reasoned knowledge, but passionate "fancy." Reconciling aspiration with credit was clearly difficult. To assert originality while avoiding the taint of singularity became a central problem for writers in all fields.
87. Abiezer Coppe, for one, put himself in the place ofWisdom: Mack, Visionary WOmen, 105. For later uses of the text, see Vincent, Literacy and Popular Culture, 174-5. 88. [Wilkins], Discovery; [Wilkins], Discourse; Ross, Commentum de Terrae Motu; Ross, New Planet no Planet. The standard treatment remains McColley, "Ross-Wilkins Controversy," but see also Johns, "Prudence and Pedantry." Ross seems to have been an early example of the professional author, paid by booksellers like Richard Royston to produce tracts for popular sale. See Glenn, Critical Edition ofAlexander Ross's r647 "Mystagogus Poeticus," 625. His role should be compared to that of the Dominican Tommaso Caccini in Galileo's struggles: Finocchiaro, Galileo Affair, 28-9, 136-41, 282; Blackwell, Galileo, Bellarmine, 112-6. 89. Brahe, Learned Tico Brahae his Astronomicall Conjectur.

FIG. I.I2.

[Wilkins], The Discovery ofa World in the Moone. Frontispiece and tide page. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

Some simply listened to the advice of their peers, and kept silent. Others relied on a flourishing and successful manuscript distribution system to evade the charge. 9o Still others, like Wilkins himself, chose to insist upon a "Philosophical Liberty" to suggest (but not to insist upon) ideas at variance with those espoused by received authorities. Geographer Nathaniel Carpenter actually funded his own printing and publication. 91 Wilkins took a further step, and ingeniously appropriated the conventions of modesty to avoid the charge of singularity. A writer must display hesitancy and probability, not a stentorian insistence on the certainty of his ideas, in order to reconcile credit with authorship. Doing so, one could avoid the trap of "boldness" into which singular authors invariably fell. Modesty could hold the commonweal together. Wilkins thus argued that Ross's "singularity" encapsulated at once his "conceit" for his own ideas, his "servile and superstitious" attitude to authority, and his slavery to "sense" rather than "discourse and
90. Love, Scribal Publication; Woudhuysen, Sir Philip Sidney and the Circulation of Manuscripts, 27-203, 224-41. 91. Davis, "Religion and the Struggle for Freedom," 514-5; Shapiro, John Wilkins, 55;

Feingold, "Mathematical Sciences," 388-4°°.

54

CHAPTER ONE

reason." Wilkins's opponent was the archetypal "captious" man. 92 In contrast, Wilkins himself had begun to articulate principles of authorship that historians of science will recognize as characteristic of early experimental philosophy. Wilkins's espousal of modesty and a liberty of philosophizing immediately reminds the modern reader of Boyle. But a significant difference exists. Wilkins's argument extended to questions normally the preserve of the mathematical sciences, not just natural philosophy and natural history. This division-between disciplines devoted to the mathematical representation of phenomena and those characterized by their collection and philosophical investigation-was ancient and persevering. Wilkins was one of several important figures to advocate a novel realignment. But such a transformation was as yet far from complete. One should therefore recall that the specific program of experimental philosophy proposed by Boyle was far from the only candidate for natural knowledge on offer. Even within the Royal Society itself, there were noteworthy alternatives, including various plans for natural and artificial histories, and indeed the "Physico-MathematicallExperimentall Learning" recommended by Wilkins himself. Isaac Newton was one contributor who pointed up the differences between Wilkins's and Boyle's conventions. 93 All, however, from mathematicians to alchemists and from experimentalists to physico-mathematicians, found themselves facing the problems of authorship and reception cast up by contemporary printing. The Royal Society helped all to address those problems, and it did so partly under the aegis of Boylean principles. It is in this context, then, and not just in that of Boylean experimental philosophy itself, that the Society's experiences of print proved consequential. It is not just that the virtuosi-as the Society's fellows were widely known - pioneered ways of dealing with print; those ways became central to the fortunes of natural knowledge of diverse traditions. The Society's own success has always been signaled by its publishing enterprises-which included the first "scientific" periodical, the Philosophical Transactions, and Isaac Newton's masterpiece, the Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. But an account of the role of the book and other printed materials in the Society should end with these, not begin with them. One must first reconstruct the efforts to enact conventions of reading within
92. [Wilkins]' Discovery, 3; Wilkins, Discourse, 136-8, 144, 146-8, 226; Wilkins, Ofthe Principles and Duties ofNatural Religion, 138 -9, 203 - 4; Shapiro,john Wilkins, 239. Gassendi and Boulliaud also found Ross unimpressive: Mersenne, Correspondance, IV, 324-6, 348. 93. Kuhn, "Mathematical versus Experimental Traditions," 35-52; Dear, Discipline and Experience, 2-3, 8-9, 227-43, 245-9; Westman, "Astronomer's Role," n6-33; Whitaker,

"Culture of Curiosity," 82-5.

INTRODUCTION

55

the Society itself, by which incoming books and papers could be handled and, perhaps, published in conditions of civil trust. In its interactions with the book trade, too, the Society worked hard to establish mastery, so that its productions would not be reprinted, translated, or even pirated without its consent. The maintenance of faith in its reports-and therefore in important natural and technical conclusions-depended on its success. Without these conventions it could not have built up and maintained renown as a location in which personal authorship would be safe. Indeed, upon them rested the very possibility of reconciling personal probity with the aspiration to philosophical authorship. Without them even a respected virtuoso might fall victim to a printer's conduct. "All l' Stationers" had to be "reduced to better Termes of Reason & honesty," warned John Beale, an active fellow of the Society. But the Society had to start with its own Printer, who generated "1' loudest outcrye" of all. "I wish he had subscrib'd his own name, & not mine," Beale complained after seeing the printed version of one of his papers, for readers would otherwise ascribe its "Phantastical, Imprudent, or Distracted" character to the authorship of Beale himself. "Wee should have more prudence, than to expose our reputations to the humour of such a sordid man." 94 Surely, it may be objected, printing may have affected the communication of knowledge, but scarcely its creation. Chapters 6 and 7 challenge this assumption by looking in close detail at the practices of knowledge-making in the Royal Society, and at the notions of reading and representation that underlay them. Chapter 7 in particular addresses the forrunes of natural philosophy. Chapter 8 then extends the scope of this analysis. It proceeds to examine one of the major mathematical sciences, namely astronomy. It demonstrates that not even apparently "raw" empirical observations and rigorously quantitative calculations could escape the implications. To do so it traces in detail the course of an astronomical dispute of central importance to the history of science. From 1675 Astronomer Royal John Flamsteed worked to construct a catalogue of the positions of the fixed stars. It promised to be the greatest work of observational astronomy ever produced. But by the end of 1712 Isaac Newton, Edmond Halley, and John Arbuthnot had printed and dispersed a text of his work, against Flamsteed's vehement opposition. The unauthorized volumes presented a radically different view of the role of the astronomer from his own-one implying that he had been sorely deficient as a public servant. Even its apparently objective positional figures had been changed in the course of Halley's extensive "correction" of the press. The
94. Beale to Oldenburg, 15 March 1669/70: Oldenburg, Correspondence, VI, 560-1.

CHAPTER ONE

chapter shows in detail how booksellers, printers, and natural philosophers combined in alliance to achieve their aims. If they failed, even elementary statements of observation would prove vulnerable. Together chapters 7 and 8 therefore demonstrate the centrality of the issues raised by earlier sections of the book for both philosophical and mathematical approaches to Creation. One reason Flamsteed suffered was that his observatory stood on Greenwich Hill, several miles distant from the clamor and grime of London. The character of the metropolis itself represents a final reason to focus on England. The unprecedented expansion of London created a unique urban environment with powerful and assertive craft communities. Here, as the Restoration virtuosi always stressed, the creation of natural knowledge must be a collaborative enterprise. It must draw together not just gentlemen, but printers and booksellers too-not to mention the critical readership thronging the coffeehouses. The labor would be long, and it would be hazardous to the good names of all involved. Philosophical writers would have to negotiate all the obstacles facing every other kind of would-be author, including regulatory regimes, piracy, skeptical booksellers, and unruly readers. Printers and booksellers, for their part, would suffer frustration, ridicule, debt, prison, and death. The story of natural knowledge in this period should embrace all their efforts. This book thus proceeds in a trajectory from the printing house and bookshop to the Royal Society and the Royal Observatory: from Joseph Moxon and Francis Kirkman to Isaac Newton and John Flamsteed. It is a valuable realignment. Emphatically, intellectual history cannot be just the history of intellectuals. 95 Scientific debate as such was unknown in the early modern world. We would be unjustified in artificially selecting what seems to us the "scientific" content of disputes such as that between Newton and Flamsteed in order to explain the successes of some theories, artifacts, and individuals over others. It is scarcely a novel proposition. A vast amount of work has been done to reveal the historical and cultural specificity of such strategies. What is more original is the suggestion that we need to appreciate just how important conventions of propriety in books' manufacture, dispersal, and use really were in the practice of natural philosophy. Adding this appreciation may result not just in an extension ofour knowledge, but in a change to the very essence of our historical perceptions. Early modern London, where the cultural construction of print coincided with the fashioning of experimental philosophy, offers unusually intriguing possibilities for such an approach. So intriguing, perhaps, that it is possible to suggest a still greater implication.
95. Contra Krieger, Ideas and Events, 53.

INTRODUCTION

57

"Do books make revolutions?" asks Chartier, and answers that books themselves do not, but the ways they are made, used, and read just might. 96 We can rephrase his query to ask, "Do books make scientific revolutions?" But the answer may well stay the same.
96. Chartier, Cultural Origins o/the French Revolution, 85-7.

6
THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

Print and the Passions

I read in a book that rhe objectivity of thought can be expressed using the verb "to think" in the impersonal third person: saying not "I think" but "it thinks" as we say "it rains." There is thought in the universethis is the constant from which we must set out evety time.... And for the verb "to read"? Will we be able to say, "Today it reads" as we say "Today it rains"? If you think about it, reading is a necessarily individual act, far more than writing. If we assume that writing manages
to

go beyond the limitations of the author, it will continue to have a

meaning only when it is read by a single person and passes through his mental circuits. Only the ability to be read by a given individual proves that what is written shares in the power of writing, a power based on something that goes beyond the individual. The universe will express itself as long as somebody will be able to say, "I read, therefore it writes."
ITALO CALVINO,

!fun a Winters Night a Traveller, 139

INTRODUCTION

W

hile he was still at school, the natural philosopher Robert Boyle later recalled, he had once contracted a tertian ague. All physic failed. Reduced to a melancholic state, the young Boyle returned from London to Eton in the hope that the change of air and diet might help ease his condition. But his mentors also had other remedies in mind. To "divert his Melancholy," they made their charge "read the stale Adventures [of] Arnadis de Gaule; & other Rayiflg B06!{eS Fabulous & wandring Storys." Their treatment was by no means a success. Far from curing Boyle, he later testified, the stories "prejudic'd him by unsettling his Thoughts." They thereby exacerbated his complaint, and produced an effect more lasting than any remedy might have been. Meeting in him with "a restlesse Fancy, then made more susceptible of any Impressions by an unemploy'd Pensivenesse," his

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

reading "accustom'd his Thoughts to such a Habitude of Raving, that he has scarce ever been their quiet Master since." 1 Boyle's advisers should have read their Burton. The Anatomy ofMelancholy had endorsed the reading of learned books, not that of romances, to counter melancholy. But then, even such a well-attested remedy was prone to be counterproductive. The unhappy patient might all too easily "make a Skeleton of himselfe," Burton attested, eventually coming to resemble those "inamoratoes" who read nothing but "play-bookes, Idle Poems, Jests"and, to be specific, Amadis de Gaule itself. Far from being cured, Boyle risked ending up "as mad as Don QUixot."2 Luckily for him, in the end no such traumatic outcome came to pass. As Boyle later acknowledged, after much effort he did largely manage to "fixe his Volatile Fancy." He achieved this by subjecting himself to a rigorous intellectual regime. In particular, he found that mathematics provided the best tool "to fetter (or at least, to curbe) the roving wildness of his wandring Thoughts." The most effective way to restrain his meandering mind was to concentrate on the "more laborious Operations of Algebra." These, he found, "both accustome & necessitate the Mind to attention, by so entirely exacting the whole Man; that the least Distraction, or heedlessnesse, constraines us to renew our (Taske &) Trouble, & rebegin the Operation." They thus disciplined the mind out of the lax habits formed by romances. Nevertheless, the harmful effects of his earlier experience could never be eradicated entirely. Years later Boyle would still find himself leaving his manor at Stalbridge to wander alone in the fields, there to "thinke at Random; making his delighted Imagination the busy Scene, where some Romance or other was dayly acted." This odd behavior was regularly imputed to his melancholic complexion; but Boyle himself knew better. It was in reality nothing but "his yet untam'd Habitude of Raving; a custome (as his owne Experience often & sadly taught him) much more easily contracted, then Depos'd." 3 The effects of reading those romances had proved permanent, and Boyle simply had to live with them.
I. Boyle, "Account ofPhilarerus in his Minoriry," in Hunter, Robert Boyle by Himselfand His Friends, 8-9. This differs significantly from Birch's version, in Boyle, Works, I, xvi-xvii. It was composed in around 1647-8, when Boyle was about rwenry-rwo. See below, p. 504

note 124, for controversy about the construal of such biographical statements. 2. Burton, Anatomy ofMelancholy, II, 90. See also Bacon, "History of Life and Death," in W0rks, V, 262-3, for the harm done by various kinds of learning. 3. Hunter, Robert Boyle by Himselfand His Friends, II-2; Boyle, W0rks, I, xix-xx. For the link berween romances and such habits, see Markley, Fallen Languages, 43 - 4. For the effects on Boyle of reading romances, see also Harwood, "Science Writing and Writing Science," 43-4. But Boyle also expressed positive views on romances: Principe, "Virtuous Romance and Romantic Virtuoso."

CHAPTER SIX

Reading was clearly a powerful force. True, it could be a positive one. What originally made Boyle so "passionate a Friend to Reading," he was wont to say, "was the accidentall Perusall of Quintus Curtius." This ancient romance of Alexander the Great had "conjur'd up in [him] that unsatisfy'd Curiosity of Knowledge, that is yet as greedy, as when it first was rays'd." Here was a benefit to outweigh his "raving." In Geneva on the grand tour, moreover, Boyle would continue to pursue "above all the Reading of Romances," and would become fluent in French from doing SO.4 But it was equally evident that if one wished to retain reliability and independence of mind, then one must be careful what, and how, one read. Back in Oxford in the 1650s, then, at the time when he, Wren, Wilkins, and others were pursuing the discussions of experimental philosophy that would eventually lead to the creation of the Royal Society, Boyle applied this hard-earned knowledge well. This was the time when "the Cartesian philosophy began to make a noise in the world," and he could hardly avoid hearing about it. But he resolved to "acquiesce in no single man's hypothesis." Accordingly, by a publicly declared self-denying ordinance (and in defiance of the strict rules for reading his work that Descartes himself had tried to impose), "for many years he would not read over Des Cartes's Principles." Boyle had even refused to read Bacon's Novum Organum, he claimed, "that I might not be prepossessed with any theory or principles." 5 True or not, to the historian these declarations are remarkable. A typical account of the intellectual history of Boyle's period would make Descartes and Bacon the most influential of all the disciples of "the new philosophy," yet here one sees the "acknowledged leader" 6 of experimentalism denying having read either. At the same time, Boyle claimed that the reading of romances had had a permanent unhealthy effect on him. Clearly, he must have thought that reading exercised a remarkable power over body and mind alike. And Boyle was by no means unusual in his appreciation of the power of reading. Many of his contemporaries testified to similarly impressive
4. Hunter, Robert Boyle by Himselfand His Friends, 7, 15; compare Boyle's separate remark reproduced on p. 24, relating how, much later, Boyle had found himself suffering "violent pains" in an inn; reading an opportunely found copy of Curtius took his mind off his condition until it had cured itself. 5. Boyle, Works, I, 299-318, esp. 301-2. Compare similar passages in, for example: I, 317, 355-6; II, 289, 327; III, 8-9, II; and see also Boyle, Early Essays and Ethics, 192-7. For Descartes's own instructions for reading his Principles ofPhilosophy, see his Philosophical Writings, I, 185. 6. So called in Dictionary ofNational Biography, s.v. "Boyle, Robert." Edward Davis has appraised Boyle's claim, and found no evidence to refute it. It was Hooke who, during his employ with Boyle, conducted him through most of Descartes's works; before that Boyle had indeed read only the Passions: Davis, "'Parcere Nominibus.''' But contrast Feingold, "Mathematical Sciences and New Philosophies," 411-2, for a dissenting view.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

encounters with books at an early age. The natural historian Francis Willughby, like Boyle, was thought to have weakened his body during childhood by too much reading. Again like Boyle, he fought to become a model gentleman by struggling to regulate his "motions and desires," but never fully recovered. Still more disquieting was the experience of Abraham Cowley, who found that reading Spenser in his mother's parlor "made [him] a Poet as immediately as a Child is made an Eunuch." Even Queen Mary was thought to have been permanently damaged by her childhood reading. Such experiences extended into adulthood too. Laudian scholar Peter Heylyn was one victim, his excessive reading engendering blindness as the "Laboratory" of his brain overheated and destroyed the crystalline humor of his eyes. Henry More advised Anne Conway not to read Descartes "with too much curiosity and solicitude," since it might exacerbate her persistent headaches. Rather later, the crypto-Jacobite virtuoso John Byrom used laudanum to treat his sister, Ellen, after noting that she had been "disturbed" by reading Clarendon. The treatment proved unsuccessful, and Ellen died. Many other examples could be cited, extending from the sixteenth through to the eighteenth centuries-and quite possibly beyond. From Boyle to Byrom, these diverse experiences were widely credited. They transcended place, time, sex, and social rank.? The message was as clear as it was disturbing. As much as it could facilitate learning and the communication of knowledge, reading had the power to determine one's future fate. It could blind, derange, and even kill. Yet there were countermeasures. As much as Boyle's distemper was widely recognized, so too was his successful treatment well warranted. Francis Bacon himself had said that there was no "impediment in the wit" that could not be "wrought out by fit studies: like as diseases of the body may have appropriate exercises." "So if a man's wit be wandering," he had advised, "let him study the mathematics." 8 Such advice was commonly available in the seventeenth century, and there is no reason to suppose that it was not just as commonly followed. Boyle knew what he was talking about. Both his condition and its cure were widely accredited. Similar concerns affected both the concept and practice of reading for many men and women of his
7. Cowley, WOrks, 143-4; Willughby, Ornithology, sig. A2'-v; Maccubbin and HamiltonPhillips, Age ofWilliam III and Mary II, 4; Byrom, Private Journal and Literary Remains, I, 46 - 8; Barnard, Theologo-Historicus, 258 - 64; Vernon, Life of. .. Peter Heylyn, 6 -7; Conway, Letters, 145. For Byrom's pietist reading practices see Schaffer, "Consuming Flame." The most famous reader to suffer blindness as a result was, of course, Samuel Pepys. Other examples are provided in Condren, "Casuistry to Newcastle." Such illnesses should be compared to those described in Porrer, "Consumption." 8. "OfSrudies," in Bacon, Works, VI, 497-8. Thomas Willis, too, suggested mathematics as a remedy: Willis, Two Discourses concerning the Soul ofBrutes, 194.

CHAPTER SIX

age, first during their upbringing and later in mature life. The historian would therefore be unwise to disregard his testimony too hastily as simply na'ive or erroneous. Such testimony was put to use in his own time, and it can now be put to use again. This chapter does so. It examines the grounds and consequences of experiences like Boyle's. It argues that the powerful effects of reading to which he fell victim were not only widely attested, but supported by contemporary knowledge about human beings and the physical world they inhabited. In consequence, accounts of the practical experience of reading came to playa central role in arguments about the status ofclaims to knowledge, especially when such claims came to be controverted. In a Protestant nation, defining itself substantially through the collective and individual experiences of reading Scripture, such a conclusion was of particular importance. As this chapter shows, argument centering on professed religious knowledge became a peculiarly intense site for discussions of the nature, role, and consequences of reading. This was one reason why the representation of reading was of profound concern to pedagogic writers, who addressed the problems involved in creating good Protestant subjects-and therefore devoted considerable effort to explaining experiences like those of the young Boyle. It also helps to explain why concepts of reading became essential to the conventions adopted by the newest claimant to knowledge, the experimental philosophy. Reading is a deceptively simple practice. It can seem so obvious and selfevident an activity that the idea of its having a history appears bizarre. But it is becoming increasingly clear that people in the past and ofother cultures do not read in anything that might unproblematically be called the same way as us. Reading shares this characteristic with other, more manual skills the historical dimensions of which have also recently been identified. 9 The historicizing of reading has particularly important implications, however, for the simple reason that it is through reading that documents of all kinds are put to use and thereby produce historical effects. The history of reading is devoted to exploring this theme. It is now a flourishing field. 10 A wealth of work exists showing that if reading is considered as a practice that, like such other practices, changes across time and space, then useful insights may follow about the character of personal, political, and social knowledge. This chapter argues that the same holds true for natural knowledge. 11
9. Sibum, "Reworking the Mechanical Value of Heat." I shall not attempt a full bibliographical survey here. A survey of approaches is provided in Damron, "History of Reading"; this should be supplemented by Sherman, John Dee, chap. 3. II. Two examples are Chartier, Cultural Origins ofthe French Revolution, chaps. 2-4, and Chartier and Martin, Histoire de l'Edition Franfaise, II· Le Livre Triomphant, I660 -I830, 52158, 657-73> 801-21.
10.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

The experience of reading is extremely difficult to describe in words. If Collins's and Polanyi's arguments about the ineffable character of skill are correct, then capturing it may even be impossible.1 2 The place of a reading practice, and its consequences as expressed in subsequent writings, are often traceable, being preserved in textual, pictorial, and material archives; but the immediacy of reading itself is not. Nevertheless, we may still hope to arrive at a useful understanding of how particular appropriations of books could come to be articulated in particular circumstances (and why others could not), why they had an impact, and why that impact was as it was. 13 The conventions adopted in the Stationers' court, which were investigated in chapter 3, and those developed at the Royal Society, which are the subject of chapter 7, are examples. Both could be assessed in terms of conventions of reading pursued in particular social spaces. The history of reading aims to trace and account for such dynamic processes, by appreciating the different practices by which readers in various times and places attribute meanings to the objects of their reading. It explains the global by rigorous attention to the local. One approach to the subject lies through what Roger Chartier calls "object studies." This involves tracing the different appropriations accorded a single book as it traverses a number of distinct social spaces. Such studies combine attention to the book itself, with its format, layout, and typography-the cluster ofcharacteristics connoted by the term mise en page-with research into the diverse conventions of reading in operation in its places of use. 14 An alternative is to concentrate not on one object, but on one reader. The opportunity to do this arises when such a reader has left traces of his or her reading, generally in the form of annotations on, or about, a set of books. The most impressive claims for the history of reading in Anglophonic historiography have probably been those based on the study of such annotations. 15 These traces are not necessarily rare. In the seventeenth century, especially, printed sheets bought at a bookshop would often be
12. Collins, Changing Order, chap. 3; Polanyi, Personal Knowledge. 13. Chartier, Cultural History, 6; Chartier, Pratiques de fa Lecture, 8, 62; Martin, "Pour une Histoire de la Lecture"; Chartier, Order ofBooks, 16-17; Bourdieu and Chartier, "La Lecture." 14. Chartier, Culture ofPrint, 3; Chartier, Cultural Uses ofPrint in Early Modem France, 6-7; Chartier, "Texts, Printings, Readings"; Chartier, "Postface," 624-5; Chartier, Culture ofPrint, 4-5; Chartier, Cultural History, 11-12; Martin and Vezin, Mise en Page et Mise en

Texte du Livre Manuscrit. 15. Sherman, John Dee, is the most sustained example of this work. Other important examples include Jardine and Grafton, '''Studied for Action,''' adapted as Grafton, "Discitur ut Agatur," and Grafton, Commerce with the Classics, esp. 185 -224. A thoughtful defense
of the approach is presented in Grafton, "Is the History of Reading a Marginal Enterprise?" esp. 155 - 6. The possibilities for the history of science are suggested by Gingerich, "Copernicus's De Revolutionibus."

386

CHAPTER SIX

regarded not as complete, but as remaining to be individualized by readers' additions. 16 The study of the resulting hybrids, half printed book and half unique manuscript, shows convincingly that "scholarly" reading, at least, was, as Grafton and Jardine put it, a "goal-orientated" enterprise. It aimed at immediate, active purposes, the "interpretation" of a given work varying according to what those purposes were. The efforts ofseveral historians have provided us with an incipient taxonomy of annotation strategies that may eventually revolutionize our understanding of how such interpretations were constructed. This chapter employs an approach rather different from these, but at the same time one complementary to both object studies and the analysis of annotations. It begins from experiences like Boyle's. In describing such powerful effects, Boyle's cautionary statements directed attention to what he thought actually occurred at the decisive moment of face-to-face confrontation between reader and read. Historians have remained remarkably reticent about this moment of confrontation, perhaps because it seems to embody so self-evident, so natural an act that there appears little they could usefully say about it. Even historians of reading have largely left it alone. Yet it ought to be central to an account of the history of reading, ifonly because, as a matter of fact, descriptions of it have varied widely in different periods. What is it that passes from page to mind when someone reads, and how does it have an effect? This is the fundamental question with which the analysis presented here begins. It is properly answered, however, not in out own terms, but in those of early modern England. 17 The following account does not propose that all individuals theorized the act of reading in the same way-nor even that most theorized it at all. But it does identify the most important anatomical, physiological, philosophical, and moral resources available to them when they did need to understand it. And it shows that when they wished to propose radical new kinds of knowledge, the need to deploy those resources could become extremely urgent. The most important resources available to early modern readers for describing their experiences derived from what contemporaries called the passions. Human beings perceived letters on a page through the mediation of their bodies; the passions were the emotional, physiological, and moral responses of the human body to its surroundings, and thus played an unavoidable part in the reading process. This chapter provides an account of these composite entities. They were discussed and analyzed by all branches of society, providing an extensive array of knowledge usable in understanding one's own and one's neighbors' conduct. The chapter argues that accounts
16. McKitterick, History ofCambridge University Press, xiii.
152.

17. Robert Damron calls in passing for such an approach in his "History of Reading," See also his "Readers Respond ro Rousseau."

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

of reading generated with the aid of such knowledge became central to the attempted discrimination of true insight from dangerous error. Individuals who failed to control their passionate reading practices, and thereby fell prey to them, could then be diagnosed by a series ofsymptoms that were likewise understood in terms of the passions. And remedies could be proposed for them, disciplining the passions into conformity. By recovering this extensive and influential repertoire, the chapter provides a fresh perspective on the most personal aspects of reading. It also helps to bring the histories of reading and knowledge together.
SEEING PHYSIOLOGY

There is a fundamental problem with which to start. In early modern England, what was it to "see"? When one exercised vision, what actually passed through the air and into the eye, and how did it have an effect when it got there? Patrick Collinson has suggested that this question is really "where an account of protestant culture ought to begin." What follows will largely confirm his suggestion. IS Once this problem has been addressed, we shall then be able to move on to the more specific question of how one saw letters on a page. These two issues are the subject of this section. As an initial strategy, one can try interpreting Boyle's words at face value. "Prejudice," "fancy," "impressions," "habitude," "thoughts"-to an informed early modern reader these were readily recognizable terms. They were in regular use both in lay contexts and, more formally, in a variety of sciences relating to the mechanisms of perception and the workings of the mind. They should perhaps be read literally, then, to refer to processes of the mind and body. Knowledge of such processes was widely available in early modern England. It was staple to any number of discourses, ranging from everyday medicine, through casuistry and the moral advice of ministers, to highly specialized anatomical practice. Contemporaries felt able to use such resources to describe their experiences of perception and reasoning, including those involved in reading, and invested enough faith in them to act on those descriptions. The following discussion attempts to recover their knowledge and its uses. Discussions of vision began with the eye. They typically represented it as the natural equivalent ofa camera obscura (fig. 6.1).19 This was a well-known
18. Collinson, Birthpangs ofProtestant England, 122. An interesting examination of the physiology of viewing for a slightly earlier period is Summers's Judgment ofSense. Saenger, "Physiologie de la Lecture," "Silent Reading," and Space between WOrds, 1-17, use the perspective of modern physiology. 19. Kepler, Ad Vitellionem Paralipomena, 176-7; Molyneux, Dioptrica Nova, 103-4; Newton, Opticks, 9-II. Compare Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 162-3. See also Malet, "Keplerian Illusions," and Alpers, Art ofDescribing, 50 -51 and passim.

FIG. 6.1. The eye represented as a camera obscura. (left) Beverwyck, Werken. (By permission of the British Library, 773.k.6.) (below) Scheiner, Rosa Ursina. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge Universiry Library.)

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

device, familiar to a vast range of readers from Giambattista della Porta's Natural Magick and countless books of secrets. It could be made easily and bought cheaply. By 1655, Meric Casaubon could assume that most people "that have any curiosity" would have seen one, and the apparatus remained popular throughout the succeeding century, not least as an aid for drawing. 20 A camera obscura consisted of a darkened chamber of any size, ranging from a small box to a room large enough to contain a human being, with a pinhole in one wall. Light admitted through this hole formed an inverted image of the scene outside on the opposite surface. 21 In the eye, correspondingly, an image was thought to be "imprinted" or "painted" (both words were used) on the retina. The process could be reconstructed using specimen eyes from cadavers or, human bodies being scarce commodities, from animals (fig. 6.2). William Briggs used sheep's eyes to demonstrate his own theory before the Royal Society. Based on such studies, artificial eyes could be constructed on the camera obscura model, Wren suggesting that one would represent a suitable gift for Charles II should he ever deign to visit the Society.22 Such gadgets served to demonstrate the casting of an inverted image onto the retinal surface. From thence, it was assumed, "spirits" channeled in the optic nerves transmitted this image instantly to the brain. There it was again "impressed" onto something called the sensus communis, and thus perceived by the mind. 23 In what was by the Restoration probably the most influential general treatment of the subject, Rene Descartes famously placed this sensus communis at the pineal gland. Whether or not this was accepted, contemporaries universally believed that the sensus communis was imprinted at the same instant as the retina and in a manner mediated by the structure of the human body. 24 Such a camera obscura model provided a convincing account of correct perception. But impressions incident upon the sensus communis need not come from the eyes. They could equally have originated from any of the senses of smell, taste, hearing, or touch. Or, more interestingly, they might not have derived from outside the body at all. For images produced by the imagination were apprehended by the same process of imprinting as those generated by the senses from exterior phenomena. Whenever the mind
20. Eamon, Science and the Secrets ofNature, 308; [Hoofnail] , Art ofDrawing, 7-9. Robert Boyle's operator gave an interesting account of the camera obscura and imaginative imprinting: G[regg], Curiosities in Chymistry, 72-82. 21. Porta, Natural Magick, 363 -5; Casaubon, Treatise Concerning Enthusiasme, 43. 22. Briggs, Ophthalmo-graphia, 73-4; Briggs, Nova Visionis Theoria; Birch, History, I, 288-91, 391; IV, 136, 137, 203· A model eye was indeed stored in the Society's repositoty: Grew, Musaeum Regalis Societatis, 359. For Robert Boyle's experiments supporting the principle, see Royal Society Ms. Boyle P. 38, fols. 68'-7°', 141'-142'. 23. Descartes, Philosophical Writings, I, 41-2, 166-7; Kepler, Dioptrice, 23-5. 24. Descartes, Philosophical Writings, I, 39-40, 152-6.

Rene Descartes tests the camera obscura theory by peering through the eye ofa bull. Descartes, La Dioptrique, in Oeuvres, VI. (By permission of the Syndics ofCambridge University Library.)
FIG. 6.2.

FIG. 6.3. (above right, below) The physiological mechanisms permitting perception and response. Descartes, L 'Homme, in Oeuvres, Xl. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

391

FIG. 6+ Isaac Newton's description of experimenting on his own eye. This was one of an intermittent series of trials that Newton undertook privately over a period of at least a year in the mid-166os. He had already concluded that his "fantasie" could excite the spirits in his optic nerve sufficiently to generate apparent images; now he "tooke a bodkin & put it betwixt my eye & y< bone as neare to y< backside of my eye as I could." Pressing the surface of his eye with this bodkin, he found that he could generate "white darke & coloured circles." Together the experiments illuminated the reliance of vision on physical and imaginative capacities. CUL Ms. Add. 3975, p. 15. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

hS)
jl

either imagined or perceived an object, then, it was really considering an image traced on the surface of the sensus communis-and it could not always be sure which it was doing. Descartes himself therefore insisted that the term idea must be applied rigorously to any such "impressions," whether imaginative or perceptive in origin. Ideas of either source then acted as the spur to physical actions, the impulses inducing such actions being transmitted through the body by the same nervous system that mediated perception (fig. 6.3).25 This intimate and continuous interaction of body, imagination, and perception had at least one important consequence. It meant that camera obscura models of vision could never be as straightforward as their proponents had perhaps hoped. Far from having been rendered regular, and even mechanical, vision remained liable to corruption and counterfeiting, either by the imagination or by physiological conditions. Qualifications to camera obscura models accordingly became as routine as the models themselves. In
25. Descartes, Philosophical Writings, I, 42,105-6.

392

CHAPTER SIX

fact, even Della Porta had noted the problem. Describing the camera obscura, he had remarked that observers had to be conditioned in order for it to function properly, because of the role of "affection" in conditioning perception. 26 Descartes, too, observed that his anatomical demonstration of the eye as a camera worked only as long as it kept its "natural" shape-"for if you squeeze it just a little more or less than you ought, the picture becomes less distinct." 27 Just what constituted proper squeezing he left unclear. And Isaac Newton endorsed such qualifications in his Opticks, which came to be recognized as the most authoritative of all discussions. Newton warned that vision could be corrupted if the eye were either colored, too "plump," or not plump enough. Only in the proper circumstances, and only if the perceived phenomena were not "produced or altered by the power of imagination," could knowledge of colors be considered a Newtonian science. This he had actually verified on himself, managing solely through the exercise of his "fantasie" to create an illusory perception of the Sun in his rooms at Trinity College, Cambridge (fig. 6.4).28 The structure of the brain and nervous system thus played an essential part in the reception, manipulation, and effects of ideas. Even with a camera obscura model of the eye, this part could not be gainsaid, since it was built into the human frame. On the contrary, it must be confronted and understood. Although mechanical philosophers might call in principle for explanations to be couched in reductionist terms, in practice this further understanding had to be physiological (and, as we shall see, even moral) in character. To account for the construction of knowledge from perceptions, one needed an appreciation of the "affections" attendant upon the human constitution. The most significant contemporary account of this subject was to be found in the work of Oxford's Sedleian Professor of Natural Philosophy, Thomas Willis. In the early 1660s Willis undertook a series of detailed dissections of the brain and nervous system, accompanied by Richard Lower, who probably did much of the more grisly work, and by Christopher Wren, who drew the results. 29 Theirs was an epic enterprise. "Hecatombs" of cadavers were dissected- not only humans, but horses, sheep, calves, goats, hogs, dogs, cats, foxes, hares, geese, turkeys, fish, and even a monkey. In
26. Porta, Natural Magick, 363. 27. Descartes, Philosophical Writings, I, 167. 28. Newton, Opticks, 9-II, 48, 135-7; Westfall, Never at Rest, 93-5. For similar cases see Schaffer, "Self Evidence." 29. Willis, "The Anatomy of the Brain" and "The Description of the Nerves," in Remaining Medical WOrks, 55-136 and 137-92. For the circumstances surrounding this work see Willis, Thomas Willis's Oxford Lectures, 37- 49, 52 ff.; Frank, "Thomas Willis and His Circle"; and Bynum, "Anatomical Method." The main source for anatomical work in the period is Frank, Harvey and the Oxford Physiologists.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

393

London, Robert Boyle was kept informed of their labors, Walter Charleton repeated them, and Henry Oldenburg spread news of their findings across Europe. 3o Together these men created the most importanr work on neurology to be produced before the nineteenth century. And technical though it was, it proved extraordinarily influential in a range of contexts. Aspiring gentlemen were even exhorted to study it as a central part of their education. It was thereby also to prove of prime importance to representations of reading,31 It is important to convey some impression of the motivations driving Willis's enterprise, since that enterprise was a specific and unusual one. Willis was a convinced Church of England man, to the extent of having orchestrated clandestine Common Prayer services during the Interregnum. His project reflected this. Its printed representation, dedicated to his patron, the archbishop of Canterbury, revealed that Willis was not engaged in routinely didactic morbid anatomy. His true subject was what he called "Psycheology," or the "Discourse of the Soul." Willis began from a widely shared belief that the soul was divisible into two parts: a rational component, which was immaterial, immortal, and intellectual, and a sensitive one, which was corporeal and mortal. The former could not be subjected to physiological study, but the latter could, and on this he focused. This "sensitive soul" conducted all the physical processes of perception and movement, acting through the vehicle of "animal spirits" sublimed from the blood and channeled through the nervous system. These were the same spirits as those that transmitted perceptions to the sensus communis. They were like internal, corporeal "Rays of Light," Willis declared: "For as light figures the Impressions of all visible things, and the Air of all audible things; so the Animal Spirits, receive the impressed Images of those, and also of Odors, and tangible Qualities." Their essence was the conveyance of perceptions. Imagination and perception were thus difficult to distinguish precisely because they depended on this same vehicle. It was a vehicle not confined to any particular organ, let alone to the mind, but "Coextended to the whole Body." Willis wanted his anatomy to elucidate its workings to the full. 32 Believing that the sensitive soul functioned by the flow of animal spirits through material channels, Willis thought it possible to reveal those channels by anatomical practice. He especially hoped to identify in the brain
30. Birch, History, I, 416, 421-2, 436, 444; Oldenburg, Correspondence, II, 141-5, 300-9, 631-3. 31. Rousseau, "Nerves, Spirits, and Fibres"; Rousseau, "Science and the Discovery of the Imagination"; Mullan, "Hypochondria and Hysteria"; Lawrence, "Nervous System and Society in the Scottish Enlightenment." 32. Willis, Two Discourses, sigs. [A3 v l-[A4 v l, 5, 18, 38ff.

394

CHAPTER SIX

FIG. 6.5. Thomas Willis's anatomy of the human brain. These engravings show the brain from the base (left) and the top (right). In (left), B is the cerebellum, C the "oblong marrow," E the optic nerve, and F and G the motive and "pathetick" nerves of the eyes. In (right). the halves of the brain have been pulled up and apart to reveal inner structures. Here, P is the cerebellum, B the callous body (which in an intact brain would touch the pineal gland, F), and E the oblong marrow. Willis, Remaining Medical WOrks. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Libraty.)

physical features associated specifically with such functions as memory, imagination, and the appetites. This required a novel method of dissection. He advocated "a new way of opening ye Brains," observers reported. Rather than slicing horizontal sections through the head, he uncovered the brain layer by concentric layer, thereby revealing "the order of Nature" (fig. 6.5).33 It was their embodiment in practice that lent such legitimacy to Willis's views. His anatomical works were not just texts: they were representations of practical procedure, performed before authoritative audiences, and this afforded them their unique prestige. Briefly, Willis's technique revealed two membranes enveloping the brain. The first of these membranes was loose, and in four places it formed cavities called "bosoms." Blood flowing into the brain collected in these bosoms, before fine vessels carried it down into the interior of the head. Beneath lay
33. Willis, "Anatomy of the Brain," 55-62, 91, 95-7; Willis, Two Discourses, 23-5; Isler, Thomas Willis, 25. For Willis's treatment of vision as analogous to the camera obscura, see Two Discourses, 33, 75-86.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

395

the second membrane, tightly fitting the three inner structures ofcerebrum, "oblong marrow," and, to the rear, cerebellum. Its purpose was to distinguish these parts of the brain one from another, and thereby to act as a "fence" restraining the animal spirits in their proper "orbs." 34 All physicians and anatomists knew that the animal spirits had their origin in the blood. But Willis could now discern exactly where, and hence how, they were generated. He could see within each of the bosoms a matrix of strong "Fibres" that, like "flood-gates," must control the flow of blood into the brain. Additional ligaments traversing the bosoms controlled their expansion and contraction. 35 Together these fibers regulated the flow of blood through the bosoms. When full, the bosoms acted as heat sources, gradually warming the blood flowing onward in tiny vessels beneath. Eventually, "as if it were a certain Chymical operation," this blood underwent a distillation. Its subtle extracts were then channeled toward the brain by vessels in the inner membrane, which, when injected with an ink solution, could be displayed to an audience as resembling "little serpentine chanels hanging to an alembic." Like this alchemical apparatus, they served as extra "distillatory Organs," rendering the refined blood still more "subtil and elaborated" as it proceeded. At length, they admitted only the finest "Chymical Elixir" into the inner brain, in the form of animal spirits. There they circulated "as in a publick Emporium or Mart" in a "free and open space" at the base of the brain. This was the "common Sensory"-the sensus communis. Here the brain registered the "Strokes of all sensible things." It was here that impressions from the senses and the imagination were combined, and remembered ideas received. This was also the center from which the animal spirits were "directed into appropriate Nerves" for all responsive actions. A "fountain" of animal spirits continuously flowed out from the semus communis, through the spinal cord, to all parts of the body, there to "irradiate" it and spark such actions (fig. 6.6).36 The sensus communis was a space of open exchange, where the animal spirits mingled freely. But some differentiation of the motions they stimulated nevertheless remained. Most important, while the cerebrum was the site of imaginative and rationative actions, the cerebellum directed all those functions that did not rely on imagination, memory, or reason: that is, all the regular motions necessary for life. The nerves controlling respiration, nutrition, and similar functions derived their spirits from here. It seemed essential, indeed, that this distinction be maintained, for otherwise the most
34. Willis, "Anatomy of the Brain," 56-9, 81-4. 35. Willis, "Anatomy of the Brain," 80. 36. Willis, "Anatomy of the Brain," 79, 80, 82-3, 87-8, 93, 95, 96; Willis, Thomas Willis's Oxford Lectures, 54-6, 65-7.

CHAPTER SIX
FIG. 6.6. The human nervous system. Extending to all parts of the body, this network of channels for the animal spirits transmitted perceptions to the brain and responses from it. Willis, Remaining Medical WtJrks. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

basic life-preserving activities of the body would have lain vulnerable to "the winds of Passions and Cogitations." Yet even separated in this way they were not immune, for a mechanically transmitted "sympathy" linked the spirits in the cerebellum and those in the cerebrum, so that any passion excited in the latter could still produce physical symptoms. In fact, whenever "a violent passion, as Joy, Sadness, Anger, [or] Fear" arose, its "impression" would produce "notable mutations in the Organs." Hence someone subject to a fit of rage, say, experienced changes in body temperature, heart rate, and stomach functions. 37 This, then, was the dynamic system in which vision and imagination participated. Willis went on to describe how. He began by accepting the
37. Willis, "Anatomy of the Brain," 96, J08, IIo-6; Willis, Thomas Willis's Oxford Lectures, 145 - 50.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

397

camera obscura theory of the eye. On seeing an object, the "Optick Species" generated by the eye at the retina was transmitted through the optic nerves and into the brain. There a variety of things might happen. It might simply be reflected from the callous body back through the nervous system, yielding the sort of reflex action maintained even in sleep. But if it disturbed the spirits circulating in the sensus communis, then it gave rise to a passion. It could also pass still further into the cortex, when "it impresse[d] on it the image or character of the sensible Object." This generated a memory. Perception, imagination, and memory were therefore part of a single, continuous process. Seeing an object, imagining one, and reasoning with the resulting ideas and memories could never be separated from the circulation of the blood and the movements of the body. 38 Willis showed how much a skilled anatomist could do to elucidate the nature, routes, and purposes of the animal spirits, despite the impossibility of actually seeing them in action. His work was exemplary of the efforts of anatomists and natural philosophers to understand and account for such processes. More than any other, however, it was Willis's description that became influential. The fundamentals of his account came to be widely known in succeeding years, and were put to use in an extensive range of debates. The notion that vision, imagination, and the body were intimately linked, long a commonplace, had been given a newly authoritative explanation. The proper way to approach that special instance of vision that was reading would therefore need to embrace both physiology and the faculties of the mind. Fortunately, Willis's anatomical investigations had led him to a readily available set of resources to aid such an approach: those developed in the extensive literature devoted to the passions.

A DISCOURSE OF THE PASSIONS

In order to appreciate the significance of that literature, it is necessary to grasp the meaning of the term passion in early modern England. Passions were "Apprehensions, resentments, or emotions of the Soul," caused by "some motion of the spirits." That is, they were the responses excited by the senses and other stimuli, such as the imagination, when they impressed the sensus communis: passiones correspondent to the actiones of motions impinging on the brain. They included and affected both reasoned and corporeal responses. 39
38. Willis, Two Discourses, 33, 35-6, 55-60, 77-8; Willis, "Anatomy of the Brain," 634, 96; Willis, "Description of the Nerves," 139-40; Willis, Thomas Willis's Oxford Lectures, 54-6,100; Frank, "Thomas Willis," 134. 39. Descartes, Passions, 23. One of the few modern writers to stress this relation of passio to actio was Collingwood: see his Autobiography, 128 n. 1, and Principles ofArt, 219.

CHAPTER SIX

The wide scope of this definition meant that the range of early modern passions embraced some that we would not now recognize as passions at all, the desire for knowledge being a significant example. Their study, accordingly, was reckoned to be extremely important. The philosophy of the passions, wrote Catholic priest Jean Senault, might be less formally prestigious than other branches of learning, but in reality it was fundamental to them all. "For it is she that makes Philosophers, and which purifying their understanding, makes them capable of considering the wonders of Nature." In short, all knowledge rested on a foundation of knowledge of the passions. Such learning was "to Philosophy, the same as Foundations are to Buildings." Someone possessing adequate knowledge of-and thereby control overthe passions was in a good position to become "an honest man, ... a good Father of a Family, a wise Politician, and an understanding Philosopher." Those without such knowledge would soon be forced to confess that "our Passions are chains, which make us slaves to all such as know how to manage them well" (fig. 6.7).40 In accordance with this principle, a large and popular literature had grown up-as extensive, probably, as that dealing with civility-describing the passions and drawing moral and practical conclusions from them. One of its contributing authors, Rene Descartes, had anticipated that by its title alone his own account of the passions would sell better than any ofhis other books; and the only one of his works that the young Boyle would admit to reading was this one. 41 Willis, Descartes, royal physician Walter Charleton, and others created a market for such discussions that was still flourishing in the mid-eighteenth century.42 Willis's anatomical work, which demonstrated that every "passion of the sensitive Soul" affected both the physical body and its perceptions "whether we will or no," became one of their central foundations (fig. 6.8). Chapter 2 argued that Stationers were amphibious creatures. They traversed what could be seen as essentially separate realms of commerce and civility. But there was a more profound sense, expressed by Sir Thomas Browne and others, in which every human being was a "great and true Amphibium." Each person was a soul forced to live in the alien environment of the body. It was therefore reasonable to consider the experiences, achievements, and anxieties of such a creature in terms of this disjunction. The
Use ofPassiow, sig. CIV, 163. See also Kroll, Material Word, 219-23. 41. Descartes, Passions, sig. B3 v · 42. See, for example: Wright, Passiow of the Minde; Reynolds, Treatise of the Passiow; Descartes, Passiow; Senault, Use of Passiow; [Charleton), Natural History of the Passiow; Mandeville, Treatise of the Hypochondriack and Hysterick Passiow; Hutcheson, Essay on the
40. Senault,

Nature and Conduct ofthe Passiow andAffectiow.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

399

FIG. 6.7. Reason, enthroned, enchains the passions: an ideal sought by almost all readers but, it seemed, attained by few. Frontispiece to Senault, Use ofPassions. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

discourse of the passions did just that. 43 Physicians and ministers, in particular, felt themselves qualified to use this branch of knowledge, which, traversing the gulf separating body from soul, embraced embodied morality-the morality of amphibians. As Bishop Edward Reynolds expressed it when introducing his own treatise on the subject, "whereas the principall acts of mans Soule are either of Reason and Discourse, proceeding from his Understanding; or of Action and Moralitie, from his Will; both these, in the present condition of mans estate, have their dependance on the Organs and faculties of the Body." With respect to the understanding, the body was "an Eye, through which it seeth"; with respect to the will, the body was "a
43. Browne, WOrks, I, 45, 66.

FIG. 6.8. Superstition and the Passions. Hogarth's engraving, originally entitled "Enthusiasm Delineated," was intended to ridicule what its artist called "the Idolatrous Tendency of Pictures in Churches and prints in Religious books." At first designed to attack Catholics, in this state the engraving substitutes Methodists as its target. Various examples of "credulity" and "superstition" are prominent, including Mary Toft, the Surrey woman who had claimed to give birth to rabbits in 1726. On the right-hand side, a thermometer of passionate states appears, its summit being that of "raving" (the same state, perhaps, as that induced in the young Boyle by reading romances). The fount of the passions is a brain recognizably descended from the illustrated dissections ofThomas Willis. (By permission of Dr. K. C. Knox.)

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

4°1

Hand, by which it worketh." This being so, the body, while it did not possess an absolute dominion over reasoning, could exercise a "disturbing power." Its conditions and distempers affected the impressions perceived at the sensus communis, and could therefore distort the conclusions derived from them. 44 This was why the interaction between body, reason, and action that was summed up in the passions was so crucial to practical morality. What made the passions especially problematic to such writers was the postlapsarian state of humanity. Before the Fall, everyone agreed, human apprehensions had been in perfect accord with nature. The senses had "made no false reports," and, being "uninterressed," had remained in conformity with Reason. The expulsion from Eden had destroyed this harmony, throwing distortive passions between the human mind and the rest of Creation. The corrupted senses of a representative early modern reader were therefore thought to be "subject to a thousand illusions." Guided by their passions, the mind was almost certain to go wrong. 45 Charleton, for one, declared that "most commonly false Opinions are occasioned ... by our Passions." 46 The serious problem of knowledge that this implied was the reason why understanding the passions was so important. At stake were the discrimination of truth from falsity and the moral propriety of all actions resultant upon such discrimination. Contemporary understanding of the passions was complex and highly developed and can only be summarized here. In any case, it was impossible to enumerate all the passions that could affect one's knowledge. The variety of impressions constantly arriving at the brain from the senses, memory, and imagination made their number simply too great. But writers nevertheless did frame a standard taxonomy in terms of which they and their effects could be discussed. First, they recognized a division between metaphysical and physical passions. These were relatively simple: the former were restricted to the rational soul, and were familiar to divines as the affections appropriate to religious contemplation, while the latter affected the sensitive soul through material, effiuvial mechanisms. As well as these two relatively straightforward types, however, there also existed what writers called moral passions. These were much more complex, since they engaged the body and the soul in concert. It was in relation to these that writers articulated the full physiology of the passions. The first stage in generating a moral passion occurred when the senses presented a "new and strange object" to the soul, thus "giv[ing] her hope
44· Reynolds, Treatise ofthe Passiom, 3-5. 45. Senault, Use ofPassions, sigs. c2'-q', 61, 105. 46. [Charleton], Natural History ofthe Passions, sig. A3'; a similar point about the Fall is made in Reynolds, Treatise ofthe Passiom, 5-6, 27-8.

402

CHAPTER SIX

of knowing somewhat that she knew not before." Instantly the soul "admire[d]" this image. This admiration was the primary ofall passions. It then entertained an "appetite" to know the object better, "which is called Curiosity or desire of Knowledge." Curiosity was thus the second passion. This passion was nothing less than "the mother of knowledge." On it depended all further intellectual inquiry; in particular, "all natural Philosophy, andAstronomyowe themselves to this passion." Typical genealogies then went on to recognize five more simple varieties of passion: love and hatred, desire, and joy and grief. All others were best regarded as compounds or species of these. 47 There were ways of diagnosing such passions. Their concomitant motions of spirits, as Charleton reported, "change the very countenance, gestures, [and] walking." Writers thus linked a wide variety of visible symptoms, through the physiology of the passions, to processes ofperception and imagination. For example, the primary passion, admiration, caused the animal spirits to be called into the brain to hold the image in place for consideration. Simultaneously they were also directed into the muscles holding the body in position and the eyes focused, so as to keep the organs in contact with the object. By such symptoms could it be recognized. 48 Such a repertoire of diagnostic signs permitted laypeople to become skilled interpreters of their neighbors' bodies. There is evidence that such knowledge was routinely used in the realm of face-to-face trust and suspicion described above in chapter 2. "Men judg of meanings by actions," observed Senault, "and read in the eyes, and face, the most secret motions of the soul." The benevolent use of such insight to temper one's own and others' social interactions was in large part what contemporaries meant when they spoke of prudence. By the same token, however, early modern citizens also became accustomed to concealing and "counterfeiting" their own passions. Governing the passions was essential if one were not to be left vulnerable to observers able to deploy skilled observation, and then employ what was called "craft" to put their knowledge to evil ends. Craft, to be precise, was the perversion of prudence: it was knowledge of the passions dedicated to immoral ends. Servants, with privileged access to the "upstairs" of one's premises and to one's less guarded moments, were among its more noted exponents. For those lacking such access, alcohol was a good way to circumvent dissembling
47. [Char!eton], Natural History o/the Passions, 75-89, 164. See also the similar genealogies in Descartes, Passions, 47-55, and [Ramesay], Gentlemans Companion, 139-82. For Willis on taxonomies of the passions, see Willis, Two Discourses, 45 -55. 48. Willis had provided a detailed physiology fot such phenomena, showing how, fot example, contraction of the ligaments in the bosoms in conditions of "fear and great sadness" caused the blood to accelerate noticeably to the heart: Willis, "Anatomy of the Brain," 80.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

4°3

strategies: a drunk, John Earle said, was "an uncover'd man," since "all his passions come out." 49 In extreme cases, however, passions might prove not only revealing, but physically dangerous. The passion of admiration, for example, while harmless enough in normal circumstances, could produce "Stupor, or Astonishment"-perhaps even catalepsy-if suffered in excess. Such "immoderate" admiration could not but be harmful to the health. This was a pattern common to all the passions. Their physical symptoms merely revealed one's passionate state in normal circumstances, but became actively harmful in extreme ones. Physicians, above all, became familiar with the complaints accompanying such intense states. The symptoms they encountered included leanness, defects of nutrition, melancholy, scurvy, consumption, rheumatism, lameness, bloated faces, swollen limbs, amenorrhea, green sickness, fevers, and death. As Charleton warned, excessive passions could result in "the whole Oeconomy of nature" being "perverted." 50 The problem of knowledge that the passions posed had not only personal implications, but also a much wider and even more serious political significance. The conflicts wracking seventeenth-century Europe were so violent, it was argued, because central to the human condition itself was a constant civil war. Human beings contained two distinct "faculties of Knowing": the understanding, which was seated in the rational soul, and the imagination, which was seated in the sensitive. Ideally, the faculty producing knowledge should have been the understanding,51 However, the sensitive soul mediated between this faculty and the body that provided its raw materials, and was the main seat of both the imagination and the passions. By consequence a highly unstable entity, it was subject to both diseases of the body and "impressions of sensible Objects." 52 All reasoning was thus liable to be subjugated to a strife between the two candidates for knowledge. Neither could be dispensed with. Only the understanding could perform the essentially
49. [Charleton), Natural History ofthe Passions, II3-4, 159ff.; Descartes, Passions, 88-90; Senault, Use ofPassions, 159-62; [Earle], Micro-cosmographie, s.v. "A Drunkard"; [Charleton], BriefDiscourse concerning the Different Wits ofMen, 31-2, following Hobbes, Leviathan, 53. Anger was the other state in which passions were revealed. See also Charleton, BriefDiscourse, 40 - 46, for citation ofWillis on the site of the soul and the mechanisms ofperception. For the practices of prudence see Shapin, Social History of Truth, 238-42. Images of faces in various passionate states were provided by Le Brun as what Revel calls "an alphabet of the passions that everyone had to learn to read": Le Brun, Method to Learn to Design the Passions; Revel, "Uses of Civility," 170. 50. [Charleton], Natural History ofthe Passions, 89-92, 109-10, 141-3; Wright, Passions ofthe Minde, 61-3. 51. [Charleton], Natural History ofthe Passions, sigs. A3 v -A4', 2-3. For the divisions of the soul, see Park, "Organic Soul." 52. [Charleton], Natural History ofthe Passions, 9-10, 22-5.

CHAPTER SIX

judicial processes of constructing "trains of notions convenient either to Speculation, or to practice." These "royal prerogatives" meant that only the rational soul was properly entitled to "the whole Encyclopaedia or Zodiac of Arts and Sciences; Theology, Logic, Physic, Metaphysics, Mathematics, Algebra, Geometry, Astronomy, Mechanics." All these sciences were properly regarded as "the products or creatures of Mans Mind" (with the possible exception of theology, which was of a higher order). Nonetheless, that mind still relied on the sensitive soul for the ideas with which it worked. The imagination alone was sufficient to compound and divide sensations, thus forming ideas. A constant" intestin war" raged between the two, as Willis himself testified. The "twofold Knowing Power" in every subject, he declared, led necessarily to "wicked Combinations, troublesom Contests, and more than Civil Wars." It was a vital struggle, on the outcome of which rested the fate of every individual human being, and hence that of the polity as a whole. If the sensitive soul won, then the "divine Politie" of the rational soul would be lost forever to "the brutish lusts of the insolent usurper," and hence to its appetite for "triumphs of libidinous carnality." Moralists might with justification say that the devil "mingles himself with our most intimate corruptions, and the Seate of his warfare is the inward man." In Willis's terms, the sensitive appetite "seduces in us the Mind or Chief Soul, and snatches it away with it self, to role in the Mud of Sensual Pleasures." Charleton for one considered this the more likely outcome, "for, it is from the Imagination alone that [the soul] takes all the representations of things, and the fundamental ideas, upon which she afterward builds up all her Science." 53 Proposals to tackle this problem of knowledge consequently lay at the heart of attempts to reconstruct some degree of social and moral order out of the chaos of the Civil War-and, more widely, of the Thirty Years' War. In their various ways, such diverse figures as Charles I, Thomas Hobbes, and even the notorious republican Algernon Sidney all aimed at producing polities that could successfully discipline the inescapably passionate nature of humanity and channel it to correct ends. 54 As we have seen in chapter 4, John Streater's republicanism also partook of this aim. Their answers depended on proper forms of self-discipline, social organization, literary representation, and communication. As that implies, reading and writing were profoundly implicated. Reading consequently became an important ele53. [Charleton], Natural History of the Passions, sig. A4 v ff., 48-5°,54-9,64; Browne, \%rks, I, 29-30; Lawrence, History ofAngells, 1, 35-40; Willis, Two Discourses, sig. A2V, 423. Compare Sawday, Body Emblazoned, 16-22, 36, for a different account of this microcosmic conflict. 54. Sharpe, Personal Rule, 189-91, 227-30; Hobbes, Leviathan, 37-59, 483-91; Scon,

Algernon Sidney and the English Republic, 35-8.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

ment-perhaps the important element-in these civil wars of both microcosm and macrocosm. The immediate reason for this lay in the very fundamentals of the practice, beginning, again, with vision. In many instances the exercise ofvisual perception seemed fairly straightforward, as when one simply "saw" a block of wood. The camera obscura model accounted for these cases perfectly well. But even in such straightforward perceptions, as everyone acknowledged and Willis explained, vision was necessarily refracted through the natural economy of the passions. There were other cases in which this became extremely clear, because some active conditioning of that economy must be involved in them. Speaking, listening, writing, and reading were examples. In each of these cases, simple camera obscura-like perception must necessarily be abetted by a degree of unconscious conditioning. An agreed account of this conditioning was widely available, according to which "habits" had grown up in each individual facilitating the practice in question. The motions of the animal spirits, and thence the passions and imagination, in response to certain particular sensations had been regularized over long periods of repetition. A habit of this sort was in effect a tamed, artificial passion. In learning to speak, for example, one "habituated" the motions of the spirits so that one had only to imagine what one wished to say, rather than specifying the countless individual movements of the body that together produced audible speech. The "habit" acquired in developing speech, said Descartes, had "taught us to joyn the action of the Soul, ... the tongue, and the lipps, with the signification of the words which follow out of these motions, rather than with the motions themselves." Similar habituation allowed a subject to understand speech immediately, without having to undergo a conscious parsing ofheard sounds into intelligible syllables. And it was again habituation that permitted one to read words "by the figure of their letters, when they are written." Accustomed responses rendered the translation of seen images into legible characters virtually instantaneous and entirely indiscernible. Reading itself depended upon a habituated passion. 55 The concept of habits was also central to the essential task of disciplining and pacifying the passions themselves. Habits were held to be the best hope an individual had of countering immoral, unhealthy, excessive, or erroneous passions. Habituation provided the key to exerting some practical "Regulation" or "mitigation" of them and their effects. Such action was regarded as essential for English gentlemen. Without effective control of their passions, human beings remained slaves to their own corporeality, denied the freedom
55. Descartes, "Regles pour la Direction de I'Esprir," in Oeuvres, X, 412; Descartes, Pas-

sions, 35-6, 43-4; Lawrence, History ofAngells, 1.

CHAPTER SIX

of action definitive of the gentle state. 56 Although the rational soul could not simply remove such passions, it could perhaps habituate the individual to physiological responses taming them. There were two principal means by which this might be effected, both of which could be seen to depend on the labyrinthine matrices of vessels in the brain that Willis had revealed. First, one could imagine objects producing a passion contrary to that being experienced. Pursued intensely and at length, this could eventually produce a habit separating the motions of the blood and spirits from the impressions to which they would naturally be consequent, by accustoming them to passing through alternative channels. And second, one could learn to delay judgment of an impression, perhaps by doggedly reciting the letters of the alphabet or the Lord's Prayer. This would allow the turbulence of the spirits to recede, permitting the rational soul a more detached interpretationY Contrariety and hesitation: these were the roures to virtue. Senault in fact proposed that the history of the arts and sciences constitured a series of "documents" of such efforts, urging that "the government of Passions is of such importance, and so difficult, as the better part of sciences seem only to have been invented to regulate them." 58 The habituation process reckoned so fundamental to reading was thus the same as that proposed as the solution to the political problem of the passions. This was one reason why both Hobbes and Locke reckoned habituation "the great Thing to be minded in Education." "Education, and Discipline" were conceived to be vital for channeling and restraining the passions. Prudence should be cultivated; its depraved counterpart, "craft" or "cunning," must be shunned. 59 Locke believed that "the great Principle and Foundation ofall Vertue and Worth" was "that a Man is able to deny himself his own Desires, cross his own Inclinations, and purely follow what Reason directs as best, tho' the appetite lean the other way," and insisted that education was the key to "imprinting" such prudence. He envisaged education in terms of the instilling of "Habits" into the minds of children by "little, and almost insensible Impressions." His recipe for bringing up young gentlemen was therefore strongly reminiscent of many recommended remedies for excessive or inappropriate passions. "By repeating the same Action till it be grown habitual in them, the Performance will not depend on Memory,
56. [Ramesay], Gentlemans Companion, 183-214, esp. 183. 57. Descartes, Passions, 36 -7, 171; [Charleton], Natural History ofthe Passions, 182-5; [Ramesay], GentLemans Companion, 184-5. 58. Senault, Use ofPassions, I05, 165-73- For Hobbes on the possibility of "imprinting" passions on the mind of an audience, see Leviathan, 56. 59. [Locke], Some Thoughts Concerning Education, 18; Hobbes, Leviathan, 483-4; [Charleton], BriefDiscourse concerning the Different Wits ofMen, 31-2, following Hobbes, Levia-

than, 52-4.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

or Reflection," he insisted, "but will be natural." By following this strategy to eradicate every unwanted habituation, the tutor could eventually "weed them out all, and plant what Habits you please." Bowing to a gentleman, for example, would become "as natural ... as breathing." According to Locke, only one appetite was carefully to be fostered by the pedagogue: the passion of "Curiosity." This was because his aim should be to inculcate "a love of Credit." The inescapable role of curiosity in the pursuit and acquisition of knowledge made it a central element in the formation of a gentleman. Its importance applied especially in the process of learning to read, which must be encouraged by manipulating a child's curiosity through its desire for enjoyment. The early development of reading skills demanded delicacy and care. Choosing the right materials, and ensuring that children approached them in the right ways, would rarely be straightforward, and mistakes at this stage could result in danger later. The provision of cautionary advice started early. Parents were urged "above all" to keep their offspring from pamphlets, "the Primers of all Vice." One manual of childbirth opened by showing that printing had done more harm than guns, by at least a factor of ten. And even Locke himselfseemed unsure what to recommend from the many titles competing for parents' favor. But in the end he insisted that early reading experiences must be in the form of games, not chores. By such means, he claimed, "Children may play themselves into what others are whipp'd for." When they graduated to reading their first books, works such as Aesop would be most suitable, since they combined moral lessons with "entertainment." Editions with pictures were best of all, since the images would provide a Lockean child with the necessary "Idea's" to comprehend the text. To disregard this advice and set formal tasks was to risk permanently damaging the children in one's care. "Neither their Minds nor Bodies will bear it," Locke warned. "It injures their Healths." 60 Locke believed that education made his contemporaries "Wellftshion'd" and able to display an "internal Civility of the Mind." And there is evidence that English subjects were indeed fashioned in this way. Throughout the early modern period, and on into the Victorian era, practicing tutors put just such notions of the nature of the child into effect, especially during the most elementary stages of education. Their catechizing and similar techniques were not (or not just) the mindless rote-learning drudgery familiar from later caricature. In fact, they rested explicitly on the assumption that correct habits must be imprinted on children while they were still malleable, and improper appetites drained of all potency through constant drilling.
60. [Locke], Some Thoughts Concerning Education, 33-4, 64, 175-89; Quarles, Enchiridion, century 4, no. XCIX; Oliver, Present to be Given to Teeming WOmen, "To the Christian Reader."

CHAPTER SIX

The resulting pedagogic practices, and the genres of literature they employed, helped form generations of men and women. Represenrations of the physiology of reading were thus perhaps instrumenral in creating an entire British population notoriously ready to rein in its passions. 61 But improper education could be correspondingly harmful. Bemoaning his own wandering mind, Boyle himself remarked on the misery attending "Persons that are borne with such Busy Thoughts, not to have congruent Objects propos'd to them at First." 62 Citing Willis, John Webster likewise argued that an "evil education" could cause "a most deep impression of the verity of the most gross and impossible things" to be "instamped in [pupils'] fancies, hardly ever after in their whole life time to be obliterated or washt out." He thought this true especially of pupils of melancholic disposition. It was a conventional opinion-and it meshed perfectly with Boyle's diagnosis of his own reading of romances. A poor education could instill inappropriate habits into the human frame, and thereby condition the subject for the rest of his or her life to experience improper, and perhaps even harmful, responses while reading. Unfortunately, not all pupils were appropriately trained. Physicians, Willis among them, became as accustomed to treating the symptoms of improper or excessive reading as those of the passions. They found that excessive reading could bring on a vast range of conditions. Many of them were experienced disproportionately by women, as could be explained readily enough in terms of the heightened sensitivity regularly attributed to the female body. One seventeenth-century physician thus noted that his patients complained to him that their reading brought on insomnia, breathlessness, trembling, upset stomachs, vertigo, headaches, ringing ears, "rising" sensations, and swooning. Such complaints persisted in the face of even the most fearsome seventeenth-century remedies. 63 For women in particular they were to prove highly consequential.
PASSIONATE VISIONS: READING, CREDIT AND EXPERIMENTAL FAITH

Protestantism rested on Scripture. In reading lay its definition, practice, power, and propaganda. Accounts of what constituted creditable Scripture
61. Green, Christian's ABC, 233 - 43; Spufford, "First Steps in Literacy." 62. Boyle, "Account of Philarerus in his Minority," in Hunter, Robert Boyle by Himself and His Friends, 8-9. 63. Macdonald, Mystical Bedlam, 174, 181-3, 185-92, 288 n. 59; compare Willis, Oxford Casebook, 145 - 6 for a case involving Willis himself as physician. For women's experiences of

such illnesses and remedies see also Beier, Sufferers and Healers, chap. 8. For the construction of passions and sensibility in the eighteenth century, see Barker-Benfield, Culture ofSensibility, 1-36. In the late eighteenth century, Benjamin Rush recorded the rumor that booksellers sometimes became deranged as a result of their sudden movements from one book to another: Medical Inquiries, 37 (a reference lowe to Steven Shapin).

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

and what idolatrous forgery, of how Scripture should be represented and read, and ofwhat effects it should have on which readers consequently stood at the heart of its identity.64 The making of authoritative, recognized texts of Scripture-the Authorized Version being by far the most importantstructured its history. But Protestants felt themselves under threat. The dangers posed by popery, superstition, enthusiasm, and atheism appeared both all too real and all too united. 65 In these circumstances, the credit of books professing religious knowledge became a key battleground. And arguments connecting the reading of Scripture to the human frame and the soul became central to the discrimination of true faith from error, and even from heresy. This was most prominently displayed in the combats, well known to historians, over what antagonists called "enthusiasm." As defined by two of its major opponents, Henry More and Meric Casaubon, enthusiasm was "nothing else but a mis-conceit of being inspired." It was the conviction, held especially by some of the Interregnum's more notorious religious radicals, that at certain moments God would enter into direct communication with them, and that at such moments he would grant them privileged knowledge by immediate personal revelation. 66 Such a belief clearly warranted drastic action on the part of its holder. It threatened social upheaval of unlimited extent and duration. Whether or not it actually incited violent rebellion, this led to its increasing stigmatization as a leading cause of the Civil War. More and Casaubon in the 1650s, and the Latitudinarians thereafter, were in the front line of the assault. Their campaign against enthusiasm has long been identified as an element in the articulation of "modest" schemes for experimental learning, although again the true extent of its importance remains controversial. This section presents a new account of enthusiasm and its repudiation. It argues that concepts of the passionate character of reading, and of the proper self-management that they demanded, were central to the experiences and arguments of both "enthusiasts" and their enemies. The debate over enthusiasm was a debate over the political and personal ramifications of reading. It is appropriate to begin with the experiences recorded by an enthusiast himself. John Rogers, born in 1627, is an excellent candidate. He was among the most notorious of all enthusiasts, and, for reasons shortly to become clear, we can trace the role of reading in Rogers's development with
64. This is adumbrated in Kroll, Material WOrd, 239-74. 65· E.g., Hickes, Spirit ofEnthusiasm Exorcised, sig. A2V, 37-9; Baxter, Holy Commonwealth, 31; [Ramesay], Gentlemans Companion, 19, 21. 66. [More], Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, 1-2; Casaubon, Treatise Concerning Enthusiasme, title page, 3, 17. For the origins and scope of the term, see Heyd, "Be Sober and Reasonable," 15 -23. These characterizations, of course, were polemical and contested: Smith, Pe/fiction Proclaimed, is the best attempt to recover "enthusiasts'" own perspectives.

410

CHAPTER SIX

exemplary clarity. Rogers's life was repeatedly punctuated by two kinds of confrontation with God: reading and visions. Hellfire sermons heard in his boyhood had filled him with terror, and, propelled by his fear, he had scoured the Scriptures. The young Rogers had "read every day," he recalled: "I knew not what I read, but only thought the bare reading was enough." He learned his catechism by heart, reciting it as a talisman against the demons he knew were lurking under every bush; he wrote down the sermons he heard, and learned those too; he memorized morning and evening prayers, "out of a book, for I knew no better yet." All this reading threw Rogers into despair over his prospects for salvation, and he descended into suicidal despondency. Distraught, he "took the Bible," turned to the relevant pages, and "read them over and over and over again." It did little good: "the more I read the more I roar'd in the black gulf of despair." He would "read, and weep, and ... fall flat (all along) with my face on the ground, and cry, and call, and sigh, and weep, and call for help." At length Rogers gave up reading altogether, feeling tempted to conclude that "there was no God" and that "all things come by Nature." It was a classic symptom of the despair leading to atheism and damnation. 67 He began to see demons not just under the bushes but in them, and to sit up all night in a turret in his father's orchard, wailing and drawing strange figures. Finally, as he was about to commit suicide, he was seized and tied to a bed until his fits subsided. From this point Rogers's condition had improved somewhat, stabilizing at an "inward malady" of "melancholy." He dreamed about Scriptute itself-"the letter which killed me"-and that the righteousness of Christ would be sufficient for his salvation. He awoke from this dream transformed. Rogers had long acknowledged that his dreams "seised much upon my spirits." But he had regarded them as products of his own "fancy" (that is, his imagination). This dream was different: far from emerging out of his body, it had transformed it. "I was so much changed that I was amazed at my self," he recalled. Now it was his previous reality that seemed imaginary. He leaped up, exclaiming, "Why, I am not damned! what's the matter? am I so filled with afancy?" Again his response was to turn to the Bible. He pored over its pages with new attention until, "divine infusions ... writing it within me," he achieved "assurance of salvation." It was only now that Rogers could begin "plainly to see my self (and by my self others)." Expelled from his family's home, Rogers wandered to Cambridge. There he called the devil's attempts to lure him into necromancy a ''passion.'' He would "fall to prayer [or] reading" in an attempt to ward it off. At his lowest
67. Pantheism was a stereotypical "atheistic" opinion: e.g., Hill, World Turned Upside Down, 139 - 40.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

411

ebb, reduced to near-starvation in a Cambridge garret, Rogers had another dream. He dreamed that he was walking, staff in hand, to his father's house. At first he could hardly see the path, and even began to question its existence; but at length he noticed footprints from others who had passed the same way before. He followed them, and as he did so the path became clearer. Before long a fine mansion appeared to his left, from which emerged a beam of light that partially blocked Rogers's way. He walked around it. But as he did so he happened to touch the beam, and the house immediately butst into flame. He was soon overtaken by an angry posse violently accusing Rogers himself of having started the conflagration. The furious mob dragged him off to prison, at which, terrified, he awoke. Finding himself safe in his Cambridge garret, Rogers chided himself for being scared at "a foolish fancy." He fell asleep again. But immediately he sank back into the same dream, which repeated itself from beginning to end-except that this time Rogers the pilgrim found himself accompanied by an old, bearded man, who provided reassurance that God had selected him to preach his Word. This "grave ancient man" proceeded to interpret the whole of Rogers's dream from within the dream itself. The house represented heaven, his father, God, and his staff, God's Word. Rogers would be troubled by the various ways of men, he but would follow the example (the footprints) of the saints and would find his path becoming clearer. The magnificent house represented the "great ones of the world." They were at present proud and ostentatious, and Rogers was to preach against themthe beam represented the cluster of powers and opinions he must circumvent in order to do so. The worldly powers would soon fall, but they would pursue Rogers and blame him for their catastrophe. With that, Rogers awoke again and found that it was finally dawn. The Cambridge "dream and vision," as he now called it, changed Rogers to the extent that his entire identity was transmuted. As he himself succinctly put it, "I am not I." Assured of salvation, and with his self freshly refashioned, Rogers set forth on a pilgrimage that would lead to both Fifth Monarchism and, eventually, medicine. 68 Preaching in Dublin in the early 1650s, Rogers collected from his listeners a long series of what he called "experiences," which he later caused to be printed. The origin of these testimonies lay in the procedure for admitting new members to his church. Before joining, he explained, every would-be congregant must attest to "some EXPERMENTAL [sic] Evidences of the work of GRACE upon his SOUL . . . whereby he (or she) is convinced, that he is regenerate." That is, everyone was expected to provide a record (often an oral
68. Rogers, Ohel,419-38.

412

CHAPTER SIX

record, since the subject was unlikely to be an accomplished writer) of a transformation such as Rogers himself had enjoyed-a transformation, that is, into a new and "assured" self. This was summed up in a simple formula: "Experience, we say, proves principles." 69 Rogers's own Cambridge "experience"-indeed, his entire self-fashioning as constructed in this extensive testimony-constituted his personal contribution to this effort. The history presented here was an artifact of his experimental faith. Rogers's own experience was innocuous compared to some ofhis congregants', which reflected in full the disease, murder, and war destroying Irish life in the 1640s. Yet the resulting accounts do betray certain common characteristics, showing the extent to which Rogers's experience was typical of so-called enthusiasts. Like Rogers himself, his subjects had often been brought up in families they described as godly. But they had at first practiced merely what they called "book" (or "legal") religion. They had then passed through a critical period, characterized as a death and rebirth, and emerged transformed, assured of their salvation. The conversions themselves generally came about by one or more of a relatively small number of possible mechanisms that, it was said, "wrought upon" and thereby "affected" the individual concerned. Hearing sermons, reading books, and having visions were the three main ones. Each was described in intimate terms. In each case success was then ascribed to the holy spirit's having "wrought" within the subject: their accounts of reading Scripture, for example, often displayed a sense of helplessness before the Word. Thus one Raphael Swinfield described how he was first "affected" by hearing Puritan preachers, becoming "disconsolate" and "diseased." Then, he related, a "place in Isa. 50.10. came into me" and 'fasten[edl upon me," insisting that Swinfield should trust in God. To reinforce the point, he had a dream that convinced him of his assurance. John Cooper was also converted by a dream, as were a number of others. Francis Bishop, condemned to be shot, "turned open the Bible" and read a passage enjoining him to trust in God; when he resolved to do so, he was freed. Hugh Leeson was first "wrought upon" by his wife, "whom God made the first Instrument of my good; by her often reading of the Scriptures to me ... and by the Spirits working within me, with it." Adrian Strong testified that "by the word preached, and read out of good Books and the Bible, I was brought in to God." Finally, Mary Barker was converted by all means short of visions: by "preaching, and praying, and reading, in private and publique." 70
69. Rogers, Ohel, 354-5, 362. 70. Rogers, Ohel, 396-8, 398-402, 407, 409, 41I-12, [2,9-10 (new pagination)], 4134. Margaret Aston describes the articulation of death and resurrection as a motif in iconoclasm: England's Iconoclasts. I, 460.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

413

These people, whose testimony was either written down by themselves or taken down from their own words, claimed that visions-and inspiration in general-occurred in definite cultural and practical conditions. They particularly stressed their experiences of reading Scripture, and how those experiences changed in the course of their descent into "disease" and transforming ascent into "assurance." In fact, one could characterize their personal experiences as transformations in reading practices. 71 The torpid routines of "book religion" were swept aside as God "irradiated" them directly during their exposure to Scripture. Radicals even referred to themselves as possessing an internal "Book of Conscience," "imprinted" by God's spirit to produce their visions. Appropriating mystical, alchemical, and Paracelsian sources, they spoke of the imagination, or "fancy," representing such images to the reason, which could then elaborate them into knowledge. 72 Analyzing their "experiences" of reading thus meant representing states of mind and of the body simultaneously. Rogers and his like clearly thought about the body as well as the soul. Some actually pursued medicine: William Walwyn, Laurence Clarkson, and Abiezer Coppe practiced physic, while Rogers himself eventually gained medical degrees from both Utrecht and Oxford. Medical practitioners or not, however, radicals commonly described their religious transformations by reference to the passions.?3 This being so, it should not be surprising that women in particular found their experiences transforming. As Mack remarks, "seventeenth-century men and women felt certain kinds of knowledge"-and women felt them more strongly than men. Their bodies, conventionally represented as far more sensitive than those of men, purportedly rendered them all the more prone to the passions. That was why they were deemed particularly susceptible to the pathologies of reading, such as the violent headaches experienced by Anne Conway and Queen Mary. But it also had more ambivalent consequences in a society that denied advanced educational opportunities to almost all women. On the one hand, female creativity of all kinds was liable to denigration and distrust as a mere product of the passions. It was thus readily identifiable, as chapter 2 showed, with other supposedly female traits such as gossip, inconstancy, and even infidelity. To hostile eyes, the women prophets of the 1640S and beyond therefore merely displayed with unusual
71. Compare also the transformation of Jane Turner "by reading": Turner, Choice Experiences, 11-13, 49-58, 64, 82-3, 86, 198. 72. Smith, Perfection Proclaimed, 73-8; Rogers, Ohel, 375-6, 449-50. 73. Smith, Perfection Proclaimed, 5, II, 13-17; Smith, "Charge of Atheism," 157-8. Some radicals even displayed themselves as contracting "divinely instituted madness": Smith, Perfection Proclaimed, 26-9, 32-5, 38-9, 50, 56, 57 n. 117. For other examples see Turner, Choice Experiences, 36-8; Henry, "Matter of Souls," 89, 95.

414

CHAPTER SIX

vividness a physiological difference that existing medical and ethical authorities insisted to be universal between the sexes. On the other hand, however, male scholars could also choose to see this sensitivity as liberating. Themselves irredeemably reliant on the tortuous mechanisms of reason, they might envy the untutored immediacy with which women prophets could seem to experience their "conversations with God." John Rogers himself remarked that women were often quicker to perceive spiritual truths than men, since they were "more readily wrought upon." This had immediate consequences extending beyond the epistemic value attached to women's readings. Through their claims to privileged knowledge, it affected the development of women's authorship itself. .AJ; noted in chapter 2, women authors began to appear on an appreciable scale only in the 1640S. When they did, most were prophets newly transformed by the kinds of experience just described. About three hundred women are known to have become vociferously active in the radical religious movements thrown up by the disorder of the Civil War. Inspired, as Rebeckah Travers put it, not by "ink and paper" but by "spirit, life, and power," many either published their experiences or saw them published by others. The contrast was qualitative as well as quantitative. The most prolific woman writer of the sixteenth century had probably been Queen Elizabeth I; the most prolific of the entire seventeenth was Lady Eleanor Davies, the extraordinary prophet who emerged at Charles I's court and remained active into the 1650s. This unprecedented development sprang directly from arguments exploiting the physiology of reading. For once, the peculiar predicament in which contemporary representations of female nature placed them allowed women to venture into print while averting conventional charges ofimmodesty and insubordination. Some actually attempted to transcend a realm of epistemic authority that was so consistently gendered by denying their womanhood altogether. Several explicitly claimed to have become men-not just by adopting male pseudonyms, but by announcing themselves as possessing male souls in their female bodies. These were surely the most amphibious of amphibians. Even more radical was the strategy of suppressing one's human nature altogether. Some could infer such suppression even while preserving the unique female sensitivity to visions generated through the passions. Appropriating traditional forms dating from the Middle Ages, women thus testified while struck dumb, while in a trance, or while emaciated and bedridden in the grip of a harrowing fast. What more legitimate authority for publication could there be than a direct message from the Holy Spirit, apprehended with vivid intensity and unshackled from the corrupt forms of human learning? The possibilities opened up by this unanswerable ques-

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

tion survived the Restoration and changed the conditions of authorship for good,74 Such possibilities were always likely to raise terrors in many minds. John Rogers, Rebeckah Travers, Mary Cary, Elizabeth Poole-these were precisely the people whom Samuel Parker, Henry More, Meric Casaubon, and others had in mind when they condemned "enrhusiasts." Medical knowledge could be of value on their side of the conflict too. Antienrhusiast polemics generally charged that talk of inspiration was either deliberate imposture or evidence of madness. Credit and the human frame were brought into collision in such polemics. The imagination was well known to be unstable and capricious, the seat of "distempers" affecting the mind. "Without better evidence then their bare word," Joseph Sedgwick argued in 1653, "we may modestly suspect that [enthusiasts' visions] are nothing but the distempers of a disaffected brain." Others simply manifested "counterfeit inspiration." George Hickes agreed, defining enthusiasm as "Spiritual drunkenness, or Lunacy." It "distemper[ed] the minds of men," he elaborated, "with extravagant phancies." William Ramesay likewise opined that those who "in their Enthusiasm" aspired to prophesy typically went mad. 75 A major problem with such argumenrs, however, was that they threatened to outlaw much that their proponents themselves wanted to defend. Sedgwick, for instance, acknowledged the importance of "experience" in much the same sense as Rogers's, and Ralph Cudworth accepted that of "irradiation." Quite as much as Rogers's congregants, Cudworth went out of his way to reject the idea that religion was simply "Book-craft." Only when a spiritual truth was found "within our selves," he maintained, could we be said to be "experimentally acquainted with it." "All the Books and Writings which we converse with," Cudworth told Parliament, "can but represent Spiritual Objects to our understandings; which yet we can never see in their own true Figure, Colour and Proportion, until we have a Divine Light within, to irradiate and shine upon them." Such irradiated representation could happen only in the imagination. Cudworth also defined holiness as "nothing else but God stamped and printed upon the Soul." Such language was strikingly similar to that of the very enthusiasts whom
74. See especially Mack's excellent Visionary WtJmen, I, 7-10, 23-33, 57-8, 84-5 and passim (quoted from 23, italics in original); and also Hannay, Silent but for the WtJrd, 1-14; Crawford, WtJmen and Religion, 163; Crawford, "Women's Published Writings," 2II-7, 2246; Hobby, Virtue o/Necessity, 26 -53; Keeble, Cultural Identity o/Seventeenth-Century WtJman, 264-79. The medieval precedents for such claims are described in Bynum, Holy Feast and Holy Fast, 208-18, 251-9, 261-76. For a related discussion of the implications of adducing natural characteristics for the sexes, see Daston, "Naturalized Female Intellect." 75. Sedgwick, Sermon, I, 5-6, 31; Hickes, Spirito/Enthusiasm, 2; [Ramesay]' Gentlemans Companion, 40 - 41.

CHAPTER SIX

Cudworth, along with More, Sedgwick, Smith, and Casaubon, wished to proscribe. The crux of the conflict would therefore lie in the practical application of these arguments: the actual discrimination of proper "irradiation" from improper, and of true reading from false.?6 Sir Thomas Browne provided one clue as to how to exercise such judgment. He reckoned that grounds for discrimination lay in the apparent mode of conveyance of candidate visions, alleging that the "the revelations of heaven are conveied by new impressions, and the immediate illumination of the soul; whereas the deceiving spirit, by concitation of humors, produceth his conceited phantasmes." 77 That is, true visions partook of the immaterial soul. False visions, like ordinary perceptions of the outside world, relied on corporeal mediation and therefore always arose in the body. They could never engage directly and exclusively with the rational soul. Henry More likewise alleged that "Enthusiasts for the most part are intoxicated with vapours from the lowest region of their Body." His fellow Platonist John Smith agreed, describing false visions as "seated only in the imaginative power," and ascribing the "many enthusiastical impostors ofour age" to this phenomenon. This was no mere academic distinction: it suggested ways to discriminate in practice between true prophecy and self-idolatry. A false vision was one that could not "rise up above this low and dark region of sense or matter." Aristotelian reasoning straightforwardly implied that since it originated in the realm of change, it must always manifest instability and conflict. The "prophetical spirit" could therefore be discerned from the "pseudo-prophetical," Hales affirmed, because the latter could "rise no higher than the middle region of man, which is his fancy, there dwells as in storms and tempests, and ... is also conjoined with alienations and abruptions of mind." Such symptoms, he added, were "commonly observed by physicians." 78 Hales was not the only person to reckon that physicians were well acquainted with the corporeal signs accompanying false inspiration. Reference to commonly held beliefs about the structure of the body and a physician's role in interpreting its signs recurred widely. By the end of the seventeenth century, and probably before, such criteria constituted the main resource for defining enthusiasm and visions. Antagonists therefore alleged that an ex76. Sedgwick, 51; Cudworth, Discourse, 39-41, 52, 55. Hickes was an exception, since he repudiated the need for any sort ofinspiration at all: Hickes, Spirit ofEnthusiasm, 34-5. 77. Browne, Pseudodoxia Epidemica, 30. 78. [More], Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, 17; Smith, Select Discourses, 194-6, 200-1; Henry, "Matter of Souls," 92-5, 98-100. The Bakhtinian resonances of "high" and "low" are particularly clear in such sentiments: Stallybrass and White, Politics and Poetics ofTransgression, 2-5, 43·

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

perience of apparent inspiration was in fact a "distemper." It was a physiological condition, needing to be cured rather than exorcized or idolized. 79 In short, it had natural causes. Analysis of visions was therefore a diagnostic exercise, the chief tool for which was knowledge of the passions. Henry More exemplified the approach. More knew Cartesian philosophy better than anyone else in the country at this time-he it was who introduced it into English intellectual culture, in the context of this very struggle against enthusiasm-and he singled out Descartes's Passions ofthe Soule as an influential work. 50 it is unsurprising that, like Descartes, More placed the passions at the center of his analysis. 80 According to his trearment, enthusiasm was nothing more than the consequence of an excess of "ecstatical passion," reinforcing an "illusion of the imagination." This was the consequence of a broader account of the human perceptions and reasoning. Although his own proffered physiology did not agree with Willis's, which he regarded as materialist, More concurred with the 5edleian Professor that in practice reasoning could never be separated from corporeal perceptions. It therefore must always be prey to "Phantasmes." "Thoughts," he believed, "offer or force themselves upon the mind, ... according to the nature or strength of the complexion of our Bodies."81 In certain individuals (especially women), and in certain circumstances, the images thus presented in the imagination became as strong as those sensed in the outside world-and in such a case the party concerned could scarcely fail to confuse the two. The dreams experienced while sleeping were a canonical instance. Here was the real source for alleged experiences of inspiration. In their dreams, enthusiasts attained a state of "Extasie," in which the imagination was able to dominate the sensus communis to such an extent that the memory was "as thoroughly sealed therewith, as from the sense of any external Object." 82 Thomas Hobbes reputedly died with this explanation on his lips: "Dreams are the Reverse of our waking Imaginations; the motion when we are awake, beginning at one end, and when we dream, at the other." 83 The most systematic analysis of the political implications was to be found
79. Casaubon, Treatise, 28-9; [More], Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, sigs. [A5 v ]-[A6 v ] , 220; Casaubon, O/Credulity and Incredulity, 29-30; Schwartz, Knaves, Fools, Madmen, and That Subtile Effluvium, 31-70, esp. 50 -I; Heyd, "Be Sober and Reasonable," 191-210. 80. More, "The Immortality of the Soul," in Collection, sig. [Ll4 v ]. For More's fight against enthusiasm see Heyd, "Be Sober and Reasonable," 92-108; for his appropriation of Descartes see Gabbey, "Philosophia Cartesiana Triumphata." 81. [More], Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, 2-4; Casaubon, Treatise Concerning Enthusiasme, 2ll. For conflicts between More and Willis see Henry, "Matter of Souls." 82. [More], Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, 4-5,27. 83. This is the final aphorism in Last sayings, or Dying Legacy 0/Mr. Thomas Hobbs.

CHAPTER SIX

in the greatest of all discourses on the passions, Hobbes's Leviathan. His most perceptive critic, Seth Ward, told Hobbes that his reasoning had "never risen beyond imagination, or the first apprehension of bodies performed in the brain." 84 He had a point. The passions played a central part in Hobbes's work. Since they stimulated all human actions, and no polity could ever reach such a state of perfection that their disruptive consequences could be eradicated, the passions lay at the root of both social order and social disorder. Hobbes analyzed the processes of reasoning, will, and memory as dependent on them-understanding, for example, was achieved as the result of that passion, the"desire of Knowledge." 85 Appropriating the common interpretation of passions writers, Hobbes maintained that the experience of a dream, along with false apparitions and spurious claims to prophecy, derived from the difficulty of distinguishing perceptions received from the outside world from imagined ones generated internally. He thus maintained that those who worshiped such nonexistent spiritual beings were in effect idolaters, "in awe of their own imaginations," and that the observable variety of such religions in the world was but a simple consequence of "the different Fancies, Judgements, and Passions." 86 Madness, similarly, was "nothing else, but too much appearing Passion," which could appear in certain circumstances as "inspiration." Enthusiasts and madmen alike were liable to be "cast out of Society" altogether, whence they existed in a state of "perpetuall war, of every man against his neighbour." That is, they occupied a position that was as close as Hobbes's contemporaries ever came to the state of nature-"that miserable condition of Warre, which is necessarily consequent ... to the naturalI Passions of men." If unrestrained, such "singular Passions" became "the Seditious roaring of a troubled Nation." This was why Hobbes pursued with such dedication the advocates of priestcraft and scholasticism. Their philosophy was merely "a description of their own Passions," and therefore "rather a Dream than Science." It warranted claims to inspiration, whether by priests or sectaries, and therefore led inexorably to civil warY In an enthusiast, then, the sensitive soul was well on the way to winning the microcosmic civil war: the "Imaginative facultie has the preheminence above the Rationall." 88 As writers on the passions declared, at the height of that war the subject "acted little less than like a Daemoniack possess'd with
84. [Ward], Philosophical! Essay, sig. A}'-[A4'l. For Leviathan and rhe passions see also Smith, Literature and Revolution, 159- 62. 85· Hobbes, Leviathan, 13-17,19,24-5,3°-31,37-49,53-4,59-60,69-7°,172-3. 86. Hobbes, Leviathan, 17-19, 75-6, 78-9. 87. Hobbes, Leviathan, 50-56, 62, 106, 109-Il, Il7-8, 130-1, 148-9, 153-4, 187, 461. 88. [More], Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, 40-1, 43-6, 50-I, 294-5.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

a Legion." 89 Since enthusiasts effectively surrendered their reason to their passions, far from being emancipated by their "visions," as they themselves claimed, they were in fact delivering themselves up to merely mechanical reflexes. More and his friend Ralph Cudworth had a name for such individuals. They called them "Neurospasts." Enthusiasts were marionettes, "meer Puppets" subjugated to the mechanisms of their bodies. Since they had let the sensitive soul dominate completely, they had reverted to the status of mere beasts. The body ofsuch a person became "perfectly Cartesius his Machina." 90 But More now faced the same problem of practical demarcation encountered by Cudworth and others. In the 1640S, he himself had published Platonic poems that had expressed what looked very like ecstasies. Was he then, as his opponent Thomas Vaughan claimed, "sick of that Disease I would pretend to cure others of"? More could see the point. He himself confessed that he had "a natural touch of Enthusiasm in my complexion." 91 To illustrate the difference between his own experiences and the professed inspirations of the enthusiast, however, he now recounted a dream he himself claimed to have had at around the time of the outbreak of the Civil War. More had experienced this remarkable dream at much the same time as Rogers, on the other side of Cambridge, was falling asleep to dream ofGod. A comparison between the two is highly instructive. More had dreamed that he was at a friend's house on the road between England and Scotland. Leaving this house on a bright moonlit night, he saw a series of huge figures in the sky, most prominent among them that of an old man with a long beard. Lying on his side in the heavens, this figure made a number of gestures with his arm; and finally, as More reentered the house, he intoned, "There is indeed love amongstyou, but onely according to theflesh." Back indoors, More was able to tell his companions the import of the vision, "expounding the generall meaning of my dream in my dream." He interpreted the movements of the old man's arm as "an Embleme of the proceedings of God when he chastises a nation," adducing "reasons out of Aristotles Mechanicks, which I had very lately read," for the precise nature of the movements. It appeared to have been a true vision, with a valid and substantial message. But then More revealed that "the Vision (as I may so
89. [Charleton], Natural History ofthe Passions, 62-4, 86-7; Descartes, Passions, 25-9, 33-5; Willis, Two Discourses concerning the Soul ofBrntes, 43. 90. More, Collection, 132-3; Cudworth, Discourse Concerning the Trne Notion ofthe Lord's Supper, 64; Ingelo, Bentivoglio and Urania, 91; [More], Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, 315-6. See also Gabbey, "Cudworth, More, and the Mechanical Analogy." 91. More, Collection, x; [More], Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, 309. Sir Thomas Browne made a similar admission: Browne, WOrks, I, 12.

FIG. 6.9. Frontispiece to Ptolemy's Geographia, printed in 1618. It was such an image that generated Henry More's supposed vision. Hondius, Theatri Geographiae Veteris Tomus Prior. (By permission of the Canon Librarian of Peterborough Cathedral.)

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

42 1

call it) in this dream" had a terrestrial origin after all. He had been reading Ptolemy's Geographia the evening before, and seeing a particular iconographic figure on the engraved frontispiece, "my fancy it seems having laid hold on his venerable beard, drew in thereby the whole scene of things that presented themselves to me in my sleep" (fig. 6.9). Both More and Rogers described remarkable dreams springing from impressive reading experiences. Both identified their dreams as moments of personal transformation. But they were important to them in directly contradictory ways. Rogers had moved from dismissing his dreams as artifacts of "fancy" to respecting them as genuine visions, and simultaneously from despair at the impossibility of his salvation to assurance that that was itself mere "fancy." More had pursued the opposite trajectory. From a belief that he had experienced a real vision, he had convinced himself that his striking dream was the product of his own "Fancy." One's imagination could evidently be imprinted entirely naturally by an image on the frontispiece of Ptolemy, without one's being aware ofany unusual effects. 92 It could happen to anybody, and could produce a seeming vision of utterly convincing reality. More went on to mention an even more convincing" Vision or Enthusiasme" that he had again experienced after reading Aristotle's Mechanicks. A description he had read there of a lever-based machine for timber moving had raised such a "Temper and frame of spirit" in him, he recalled, that "I should be prone to suspect something more then naturall in what preceded it, did I not consider that sometimes there may be of it self such a Terrour and Disposition of body, that may either suggest or imitate what is most holy or divine." 93 Such an awareness of the power of reading to create visions through the mechanisms of the body was far from unique to More. The effects of representing images seen in print in the imagination were well known. For example, natural magic books and books of secrets often suggested that would-be parents concerned to produce handsome children should place in their bedchambers "images of Cupid, Adonis, and Ganymedes, ... that they may alwayes have them in their eyes." The imagination also raised difficult problems of idolatry, especially when, as here, the mental images involved were of bearded old men. Puritans had long wanted to discipline such imaginative constructs out of existence, replacing them with schemes of words
92. [More], Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, 309-12. More's dream should be compared to the remarkably similar experience of interpretation while still asleep that was recorded by Descartes (Oeuvres, X, 181-8) and to the dream of George Starkey described in Newman, Gehennical Fire, 64-5. 93. Tryon, Treatise o/Dreams & Visions, 9, 20, 44, 48-51, 203-4; [More], Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, 2-5, 27, 40-I, 43-6, 50-I, 294-5, 309, 312-6; More, Collection, x, 132-3. Compare [Trenchard], Natural History o/Superstition, 12-14.

422

CHAPTER SIX

able to act as their own mnemonics: that is, by printed Ramist diagrams. As Aston puts it, every Protestant was obliged to "act the iconoclast on the idolprocesses of his mind." 94 As this strategy itself implied, however, words themselves could have similar effects. Who could wonder that Chrysostom had dreamed of Saint Paul, Sir Thomas Browne asked, since he read Paul's Epistles "dayly"? These were "butt animal visions." In his own attack on enthusiasm, Meric Casaubon likewise concentrated on what he called "the strange, but natural effects" produced by words. Metaphors, for example, worked by the "representation of shapes and images" to the imagination-that is, they worked "by a kind ofEnthusiasme." Casaubon himself could testify that when he read a passage from a classical poet, "I do not only phansy to my self, that I see those things that they describe; but also find in my self (as I phansy) the very same content and pleasure, that I should, if my eyes beheld them in some whether coloured, or carved representation of some excellent Artist." The error of the enthusiast lay in attributing to such experiences the status of certain, even divine, ttuth. 95 Casaubon agreed that enthusiasts were suffering from a medical condition: they should go to a "Physician of the body." But he did not want such a strategy to be too widely applied. In particular, Casaubon did not wish to deny the reality of demons altogether. Those who had done so, he noted, had attempted to attribute all spirits to "a depraved fancy, or imagination." He had in mind men like John Webster, who applied his account of the power of educating the passions to explain away spirits entirely, alleging that they were "effects of the imaginative function depraved by the fumes of the melancholick humor." Angelologists, on the contrary, reckoned that angels could manipulate images already present in the imagination in order to produce apparent visions, although they could not generate new ones ex nihilo. According to Webster, reading could either cause such "effects" or, indeed, eliminate them. Webster even cited the case ofa student who, by the careful reading of sacred books, had been able to expel a devil from his posterior. 96 Such writers, like Casaubon, had pointed out "how easily [the imagination] may represent to it self Devils, and Spirits," which "may make great im94. Aston, England's Iconoclasts. I, 452-66, esp. 460. For details of the production, origin, and use of images in frontispieces and broadsheets, see Watt, Cheap Print and Popular Piety, esp. 131-253. 95. Browne, WOrks, III, 230-I; Casaubon, Treatise, 135ff., 150-I, 17off., 175-6, 182-4. Compare Tryon, Treatise ofDreams and Visions, 9, for the restriction of dreams to the sensitive soul. For Casaubon's antienthusiast campaign, see Heyd, "Be Sober and Reasonable," 72 -9 2 . 96. Reynolds, Treatise, 8-10; Hobbes, Leviathan, 483-4; Webster, Displaying ofSupposed Witchcraft, 32- 4, 313, 321-2, 343 -5; Lawrence, History ofAnge/Is, 35 - 6, 40, 72.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

423

pressions in the brain, and offer themselves in sleep, or when the brain is sick." But Casaubon insisted that demons did exist. Moreover, theyoperated, like angels, precisely by casting "false species" into the imagination. Denying spirits meant also denying angels. In this too Casaubon agreed with Willis, Glanvill, and More. But he now found himself facing an extraordinarily delicate problem. Casaubon believed that those denying the existence of spirits were "Atheists." Yet such "atheists" relied on almost exactly the same arguments from imagination and the passions that he himself employed to crush enthusiasts. The difference was that the atheist relegated every spirit phenomenon to the imagination. But if there were absolutely no such phenomena not reducible to the passions, Casaubon demanded, then "What hath he left to us, that we can call truth"?97 This question-the question of what could still be trusted as truth, if experience were entirely subjected to the imagination-was fundamental. It was especially fundamental when related to reading. Such an error was at its most dangerous, needless to say, when what was being read was Scripture itself. A Protestant reading the Bible was using the eyes provided by God to "satisfie himself and others" in matters of "trust and consequence." It was this that made the correct habituation of reading so important. But enthusiasts' reading practices were dangerous. Casaubon illustrated this by the example of an ancient bishop, Synesius. Synesius used to begin reading a text, then close his eyes and extrapolate from what he had read a passage so harmonious with the work that nobody listening could tell that he was no longer reading. "It is likely that he often practised it by himself, before he adventured to do it before others," Casaubon admitted, and the applauding audience probably did not know any more of the work being read than what they had just heard. Nonetheless, "what he so supplied by his extemporary wit, did sometimes prove to be the very same that he found afterwards in the book." Such performative reading captured the fundamentals of delusive inspiration: deceit, prodigy, and display. That was why it should "very properly be referred to some kind of enthusiasme." 98 A fundamental reason for this lay in the culture of discredit surrounding printed books. Enthusiasts, pursuing their professed inspirations to the exclusion of all prudence, credited the imaginative passions generated in their reading far too readily. That was why they fell foul of the sort of strong
97. Casaubon, OfCredulity and Incredulity, 29-30, 38, 44; Reynolds, Treatise, 27; Willis, "An Essay of the Pathology of the Brain and Nervous Stock," in Dr. Willis's Practice ofPhysick, separately paginated, 43-4; Browne, Works, I, 40-1; Casaubon, Letter, 30 (for the ex-

perimental philosophy and spirits). For insistence on the reality of witchcraft, compare Glanvill, Saducismus Triumphatus, 25 - 6. 98. Casaubon, Treatise, 160 -1. For the use of books to create atheism and the attribution of miracles to the imagination, see Hunter, '" Aikenhead the Atheist.'''

CHAPTER SIX

impressions that had caused More's dream (and Rogers's). At the same time, this also meant that they credited printed books in general far too readily. By contrast, in Casaubon's eyes books were not necessarily trustworthy. Writers and printers were prone to produce "lyes, or frauds," especially if convinced that the end justified doing so. "What a world of lyes and counterfeit books" had "the conceit of piae fraudes" produced, for example, and "how many have been gulled and deceived by them, who doth not know, or hath not heard?" Casaubon insisted that reading must therefore be not a passive imprinting on the mind-the writing of a supposedly divine spirit-but an active and critical labor. Given the culture that he perceived around him, the production of safe (and true) knowledge depended utterly on this. He had a point. Even the Bible itself could be corrupted, his contemporaries feared, and small variations in such a text could have momentous consequences. The entire Arian schism could be explained by the misconstrual ofa single Greek letter. And the "errors" could indeed be deliberate. As early as 1538, Thomas Elyot had found it necessary to list heresies so that they could be "the sooner espyed and abhorred in suche bokes, where they be craftily enterlaced with holsom doctrine." William Bentley claimed that a notorious 1653 misprint of I Corinthians 6: 9-"Know ye not that the unrighteous shall inherit the Kingdom of God?"-had generated sectarian enthusiasm in Casaubon's own time, since "many Libertines and licentious people did produce, and urge this Text from the authority of this corrupt Bible ... , in justification of their vicious and inordinate Conversations." Proposals for a polyglot bible therefore stressed its purity from errors generated "by the wilful corruption of Sectaries, and Hereticks, which (as was foretold) abound in these latter times." Isaac Newton too endorsed the likelihood of intentional corruption, warning of an elaborate Catholic plot to obliterate sound Scripture by printing debased Trinitarian copies in vast numbers at presses in Spain and Italy. In Newton's eyes, the Trinitarians were powerful not because they were right, but because they possessed the most sophisticated of printing houses and distribution networks. All modern editions of the Bible were therefore suspect to him, whatever critical apparatus they might display-or, more precisely, the more elaborate the apparatus, the more suspect the edition. Others made a theological point of the concern. Before the Fall, Hales argued, just as the senses had apprehended Creation faithfully, so God had communicated his laws directly into the mind. With such communication there had been no possible doubt about "who the author was, and how far his intent and meaning reacht." But this certainty had ceased as soon as the Word was written down. It was "a great argument of our shame and imperfection," then, "that the holy

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

425

things are written in books." The press had not obviated the problem. Edmond Halley might assert that "since the Invention of Printing" the survival of "exactly the same" texts had been virtually assured, but the veracity of those texts and the validity of their applications depended on their printers and readers. Yet, Ward cautioned, the literal variations encountered in different bibles ought not to lead readers "to conclude the books not to be credited." Otherwise, he pointed out, "upon the same reason it will be concluded that no Book in the world is to be credited." On the contrary, God himself had preserved such variations deliberately. He had done so to prove a point: that comparison by appropriately laborious readers could reveal "both the true sence and the true reading" of Scripture. Errata were matters of providence. 99 Such writers argued that there was no labor more noble and more necessary than that devoted to revealing false books. It required enormous skill in obscure languages, customs, and fashions. This was one major reason why Casaubon questioned the faith placed by some of his contemporaries in experimental philosophy. Casaubon-the son of perhaps the greatest of all detectors of printed fraud, Isaac Casaubon-believed that those who, he claimed, reduced all knowledge to that produced through "natural experiments" ran the risk of losing the skills needed to ward off enthusiastic reading habits. In a learned world inhabited solely by experimental philosophers, there would be no techniques left to discriminate between true "Oracles" and "abominable forgeries," and to ward off the imaginative effects of the latter. Casaubon defended the legitimacy of the scholar in the face of such a threat. The classical learning that suggested Homer's debt to Scripture, for example, thereby confirmed the truth of the Old Testamentsomething profoundly necessary "in this visible sad increase of Atheism every where." In contrast, Casaubon charged that in their naIvete experimental philosophers even questioned "whether those works, generally ascribed to Aristotle, were, or are his indeed?" Should this perilous blend of credulity and skepticism hold sway, and people be "made incapable to uphold their faith" by an erosion of the scholarly skills needed to establish or contest
99. BL classmark 675.a.1; Starnes, Renaissance Dictionaries, 55; Kilburne, Dangerous Errors, 4 -7, 10; BriefDescription ofan Edition ofthe Bible; Propositions concerning the Printing ofthe Bible; Newton, Correspondence, III, 83 -146; Hales, "Abuses of Hard Places of Scripture," 1-3; [Halley), Miscellanea Curiosa, II, 1-8; [Ward), Philosophicall Essay, 1-2, 147-8. Compare also Bacon, WOrks, III, 287; Galileo's "Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina," in Finocchiaro, Galileo Affair, 87-n8; Redondi, Galileo: Heretic, 104-5; and the comment of the greatest classical scholar of the time, Richard Bentley, that Scripture had "been under a hard fate since the invention of printing." Bentley identified printer Robert Estienne as a "Protestant Pope" whose ownership of the copy of the Bible had led to two thousand corruptions in the editions "set out and regulated by himselfalone": Kroll, "Mise-en-Page," 37-8 n.

-THRVS
.

E ANTIQ..VI
FRAGM

LIBER

P

FIG. 6.10. Etruscan antiquities of dubious credit. Encountering these images, Meric Casaubon was almost transported. Only hard critical labor could reveal their fraudulence. Inghirami,

Ethruscarum Antiquitatum Fragmenta. (By permission of
the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

textual credit, then a "new Religion" would be the inevitable consequence. Instead of their present damaging labors, then, Casaubon suggested that the Royal Society appoint a committee to try the techniques in a book such as Porta's Natural Magick, "that so we might know what men may certainly trust to." 100 Casaubon, like More, exploited his own vivid experiences of reading books to expose enthusiasm. Unlike More, however, Casaubon recalled, not a dream derived from a book, but a direct and industrious confrontation with a book. He described an encounter with a work on Etruscan antiquities which he had come across in a Stationer's shop in London (fig. 6.10). Helped, no doubt, by the bookseller, Casaubon had found its engravings so impressive that he had all but lost control of his body: "the first sight of the book did so ravish me," he affirmed, "that I scarce knew where I was, or what I did." Had he left things at that, the result might have been similar to
100. Casaubon, Letter, 7, 15-16, 17-18, 27.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

the experiences of More and Rogers. Instead, buying the volume, Casaubon began to read it as he embarked on a boat for Gravesend. Before long he had realized his mistake. "The truth is, when once the heat or violence of my expectation (which did almost transport me) was once over," he recalled, "I began to wonder at my self." Every line of the work was fraudulent. But the point was that many other readers did credit it-even to the extent of voyaging to Italy to see the monuments it purported to represent. This convincingly demonstrated how "prone" readers were not only to "entertain an imposture," but to resist its overthrow thereafter. The question this raised was enormously consequential. "What wonder then," Casaubon asked, "if Christianism was so soon turned into Mahometism," when so limited was the dedication of readers "to discover the impostures of pretended Enthusiasts?" The implication of his experience when confronting this forgery was, then, both clear and immense. "Had these Antiquities been received generally, as a true piece," Casaubon warned, "halfthe world would have been Conjurers, and Enthusiasts by this time." 101 Casaubon, More, and others thus used accounts of the effects of reading-accounts based in knowledge of the passions-to characterize and attack false claims to knowledge under the label of enthusiasm. Enthusiasts, they charged, were those who did not properly habituate their reading and their passions. Knowledge, civility, and the physiology of reading intersected here, as they put ideas of the nature and effects of reading to work in the most controversial of circumstances, to discriminate true knowledge from error, and safe veneration from rebellious sectarianism. In general terms, the view was widely shared. As the greatest of all anatomists, William Harvey, had put it, those who read a book and did not "by the aid of their own Senses, abstract true representations of the things themselves (comprehended in the authors expressions)" would apprehend not "true Ideas" but "deceitful Idols, & Phantasms." As a result, Harvey concluded, "they frame

101. Casaubon, Treatise, 160; Casaubon, OfCredulity and Incredulity, 294-300; Shapin, Social History ofTruth. The work in question was Inghirami, EthruscarumAntiquitatum Fragmenta; it was exposed in Allacci, Animadversiones. Casaubon also identified as an important

example Annius ofViterbo, who has recently been studied by Grafton as a key figure in the history of both forgery and criticism: Grafton, Defenders ofthe Text, 76 - 103; Grafton and Blair, Transmission ofCulture, 8-38. Compare Sedgwick, Sermon, 13-14, for his stress on the need for "industry" in reading Scripture. For a slightly later example, compare also [Trenchard], Natural History ofSuperstition, 8 -9, 28, on the effects of the "Forgeries of the Papists, and the Frauds and Follies of some who call themselves Protestants." Such falsities could not have enjoyed so great a success, Trenchard felt, "unless something in our Constitutions made us easily to be susceptible of wrong Impressions." So he felt that "it is incumbent upon us, first of all to examine into the frame and constitution of our own Bodies." Trenchard described from this how "a poor Enthusiast with his Brains intoxicated with reading the Revelations" could seem to make "a lucky discovery that the last Day is at hand."

CHAPTER SIX

to themselves certaine shadows and Chimaera's, and all their theory and contemplation (which they count Science) represents nothing but waking mens dreams, and sick mens phrensies." 102

DISPASSIONATE KNOWLEDGE: IMAGES, CREDIT, AND EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY

Harvey was by this time revered by a certain group of men as providing something that they, at least, "counted science." The life of the early Royal Society will be introduced in chapter 7. Its "experimental" philosophy was designed partly to overcome the problem of knowledge that was thought to have fostered the turmoil of the Great Rebellion. At the forefront of this effort stood the victim of passionate reading already introduced, Robert Boyle. 103 Many sources could be used to illustrate the Society's involvement with issues of knowledge and the passions, not least Boyle's own writings. However, by common consent the most impressive single document produced during the first decade of its existence was Robert Hooke's Micrographia. It is therefore appropriate to concentrate on this work. Moreover, while the spectacular engravings for which it has been remembered were indeed unprecedented, contemporaries also recognized in the volume a prescriptive model for the practice of natural philosophy itself, and therefore for the safe and reliable attainment of knowledge. 104 If the Royal Society had an answer to Casaubon's arguments, it was to be found here. Hooke began by expressing concerns similar to those of Casaubon and More. He pronounced it no wonder that existing knowledge was imperfect, since "the forces ofour own minds conspire to betray us." His book was dedicated to circumventing this problem, "by rectifying the operations of the Sense, the Memory, and Reason." Hooke was thus proposing nothing less than a "universal cute of the Mind." He aimed to achieve this cure by using instruments (fig. 6.11). He believed that the senses could give false information for two reasons. They might be disproportionate to the objects of interest and thus unable to perceive them at all (as was the case, for example, with atoms); or they might err in their perception of those things that they could perceive. As a result, even the most "solid" notions of philosophers were "rather expressions of our own misguided apprehensions then of the true nature of the things themselves." The remedy had to reach to the essential cause of the problem. For Hooke this meant "the adding of artificial Organs to the natural." If the operation of perception could thereby be reguHarvey, Anatomical Exercitations, sig. [lJIrJ. Schaffer, "Godly Men and Mechanical Philosophers." 104. Harwood, "Rhetoric and Graphics in Micrographia"; Dennis, "Graphic Understanding."
102. 103.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING
FIG. 6.II.

429

Robert Hooke's principal instrument to discipline the passions. Hooke, Micrographia. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

lated, then the reformation ofknowledge at which he professed to aim might be achieved. Reliance on the "strength of Imagination" would be replaced simply by "a sincere Hand, and afaithful Eye." The "Science of Nature" had been too long "only a work of the Brain and Fancy," Hooke proclaimed, and it was time for his artificial organs to rectify them. If his approach proved fruitful, it might even be possible to recapture the original "unpassionate" knowledge that had existed before the Fall. Meric Casaubon found such aspirations incredible. Indeed, so determined was he to repudiate them that he risked breaking the prime convention ofcivil conversation by flatly denying the truth ofa recounted incident. He questioned the power of experimental philosophy to "moralize men" by recalling a story given by Gassendi in his biography of Peiresc. According to Gassendi's version, Peiresc had enclosed a louse and a fly together under a microscope and observed the deleterious physical effects of the consequent passions excited in the louse. By seeing how damaging excess passions could be, the story went, Peiresc had "profited more to rule his passions in the rest of his life, then he had done by anything he had heard, or read before." Casaubon flatly refused to believe it. Peiresc could not possibly have been influenced more by cwo insects than by the countless writings of philosophers on the passions, which had included extensive accounts of their physiological effects. Reading, not experiment, had the potential to calm one's passions. Casaubon referred in particular to the reading of histories, which

43°

CHAPTER SIX
FIG. 6.12. Hooke's representation of a period seen through the microscope. Hooke,

Micrographia. (By
permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

could even cure physical diseases: at least two monarchs had been cured after all medical advice had proved fruitless by reading Livy and Quintus Curtius (Boyle's own favorite). He remained flatly unconvinced "what use can be made, . . . in point of life and manners, of a microscope." And in the meantime, Casaubon insisted, "I have not faith enough to beleeve Gassendus in this." 105 Hooke preempted such denials. Imitating classical conventions, Micrographia began as if it were a work of geometry. Instead of a mathematical point, though - the classic starting element of that science-Hooke began with its physical equivalent, the tip of a pin. Under his microscope this sharpest of material points was revealed to be blunt and pitted. Natural points such as an insect's sting displayed no such imperfections, and Hooke took this to be powerful evidence of a Creator. The argument proved persuasive, and was frequently repeated. lOG But Hooke then turned the microscope onto "a point commonly so call'd": "that is, the mark of a full stop, or period" (fig. 6.12). Through the microscope, any such character, printed
105. Casaubon, Letter, 24-5, 31-3. 106. Hooke, Micrographia, 1-4; Wilkins, O/the Principles and Duties o/Natural Religion, 80; Memoirs for the Ingenious, I, 208-11. The point was also stressed in the review in the Journal des 5ravans: Morgan, Histoire du Journal des 5ravans, 162-3.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

43 1

or written-and Hooke examined "multitudes" of each-appeared "like smutty daubings on a matt or uneven floor [made] with a blunt extinguisht brand or stick's end." Thanks to a combination of irregularity of type, uneven cloth-based paper, and rough use of ink, the result resembled nothing so much as "a great splatch of London dirt." All letters, Hooke reported, were like this, so that seeing them as letters was not simple. The microscope revealed some much-vaunted tiny writing as barely readable without "a good [antsy well preposest to help one through," and in fact a good fancy was needed for all reading. Since the "Imaginations" we had of objects were not decided by "the Nature of the things themselves" so much as by "the peculiar Organs, by which they are made sensible to the Understanding," different organs would have produced different perceptions. Hooke had himself been able to read letters in what would otherwise be reckoned darkness, thanks to one of his artificial organs contrived from "an ordinary double Convex Spherical Lens." The postlapsarian disproportion of the senses to nature, and their alliance with the passions and imagination, were both necessary and precisely sufficient to allow human beings to read. 107 The variations of perception obviously had serious consequences for knowledge: in the brain, the understanding was "apt to be sway'd to this or that hand, according as it is more affected ·or prest by this or that Instance." Hooke now pointed out a still greater implication of the corporeality of human beings. There existed fundamental causes of prejudice particular to individuals, he maintained, by virtue of "every Man's own peculiar Structure." Every philosopher was born to "a Constitution of Body and Mind, that does more or less dispose him to this or that kind of Imagination or Phant'sy of things." This affected the sort of philosophy he produced: "some kind of Constitutions of Body does more incline a Man to Contemplation, and Speculation, another to Operation, Examination, and making Experiments." 108 The history of natural philosophy demonstrated as much. Previous philosophers, Hooke indicated, had become "habituated" against "any thing that offered it self as a Novelty or New Discovery," and as a result they had embraced dogmatism-the Royal Society's professed antithesis, and to many a sure sign of enthusiasm. Hooke could even provide real examples to
107. Hooke, Micrographia, 1-4; Hooke, Posthumous W0rks, 8-9, 13. Compare Porta, Natural Magick, 363. It should be noted that reading letters through telescopes was being

suggested at this juncture as a way of calibrating the quality of lenses when too far apart for direct comparison: Bonelli and Van Heiden, "Divini and Campani," 13. Thus Molyneux (after Flamsteed) suggested that the best way to test an object glass was to put it in a telescope tube, fit an eyepiece, and look through it at the distant title page of a large book, "wherein there are generally Letters printed of divers Magnitudes." Cassini apparently used this method in the French royal observatory, fixing his title page a quarter of a mile away on a steeple window. Molyneux, Dioptrica Nova, 223. 108. Hooke, Posthumous W0rks, 5-6, 9, 47. Compare Reynolds, Treatise ofthe Passions, 6-7·

43 2

CHAPTER SIX

prove the point, relating some of the most eminent schools of philosophy to the passions and physiology of their founders:
Just as a Man that is troubled with the Jaundice, supposes all things to be Yellow, and all things he eats, till otherwise prevented, serve to augment his Choler, by being chang'd into it: Or a melancholy Person, that thinks he meets with nothing but frightful Apparitions, does convert all things he either sees or hears into dreadful Representations, and makes use of them to strengthen his Phant'sy, and fill it fuller of such uneasy Apprehensions, so is it in Constitutions of Mind as to Philosophy. Thus Aristotle's Physick is very much influenced by his Logick: Des Cartes Philosophy savours much of his Opticks: Vtm Helmonts, and the rest of the Chymists of their Chimical Operations: Gilberts of the Loadstone: Pythagoras's and Jordanus Brunus's, Kepler's, &c. ofArithmetick and Harmony of Numbers. The Philosophy, of some Divines, is intermingled with Divinity; of others with Spirits and immaterial Agents: Astrologers endeavour to bring all things under the Power and Influence of Celestial Bodies, and would have them the chief Efficients of the World, and indeed every one according to the things he most fancies naturally, ... endeavours to make all things he meets with, agreeable or subservient thereto. 109

If Hooke was right, then there was no way, even in principle, to produce true knowledge on one's own. The history of natural philosophy was a catalogue of demonstrations of that fact. I 10 Hooke did maintain, however, that the best "Remedy" for this was selfstudy. The philosopher must "find out of what Constitution ones self is, and to what one is either naturally or accidentally most inclin'd to believe." Then one must "accustom ones self" to "a quite contrary Supposal or Practice." It was the standard tactic, as we have seen, for remedying the passions. According to Hooke, education, breeding, and social background likewise served to "sway" the affections of the individual. He especially stressed the importance of education, which, being imbibed while young, could exercise "a kind of Soveraignty" over the understanding. l l l During schooling, Hooke opined, "the Reason of a Man is very easily impos'd on by Discourse," whether that of a tutor or that of a persuasive book. The best remedy, again, was to concentrate on imagining a directly contrary idea to the one proposed, or, if the tutor were particularly liked, to imagine a speaker against whom one held a grudge. Alternatively, one could "accustom
109. Hooke, Posthumous Works, 3-4, 9-10. Compare Descartes, Philosophical Writings, 1,47· lIO. John Wilkins, for one, probably agreed, if his stricrures against "singularity" are to be read in this sense: Johns, "Prudence and Pedantry." III. Hooke, Posthumous Works, 9-lI.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

433

the Mind to an Equilibrium or Indifferency." Yet again, this is familiar as a major tactic for counteracting the passions. But such countermeasures could only mitigate the effects of the passions; they could not eliminate them altogether. Since humans were intrinsically passionate, knowledge must be produced collectively. This was, of course, exemplified by the practice of the Royal Society. To a substantial degree, the Society's great virtue was that in creating a disciplined, polite, and above all collective judgment it went as far as humanly possible to eliminate passionate error. Its reading, writing, and printing practices were a core element in this scheme. Hooke's recommendation, since it valued social processes of legitimation so highly, thus necessarily brought him back to the issue of the proper recording and transmission of knowledge. During his four decades at the Society, Hooke returned repeatedly to the problems associated with reading and writing experimental knowledge. Experiments must be "registered" as soon as they had been conducted, he insisted, in as much incidental detail as possible. They should be written down on "a very fine piece of Paper" and entered in a large book called a "Repository." Just as the quality of the lens in a microscope was allimportant, moreover, so was the visual layout of this register. Its contents must be "ranged in the best and most Natural Order" so as to be "manifest to the Eye." Throughout, everything must be expressed in as few words as possible, perhaps even in shorthand, so as to be "the more obvious, and ... thereby the less disturb the Mind in its Inquiry." It was best to write in different inks, with consistent color coding to aid immediate perception. For it was not the mere fact of registration that Hooke thought so important, but the precise manner in which information was traced out on the page. This involved constructing a visual convention of typography contiguous with the conventions of engraved images that were so prominent a part of his Micrographia. Only if recorded in a correct manner, pictorially and typographically, could experimental matters of fact help in his project to "rectify the Mind." 112 The pictorial aspect of this enterprise deserves particular emphasis. Micrographia itself was justly renowned for its innovative use of images, of course. But in Hooke's broader schemes, typography effectively fused into illustration, as the layout and impression (in both senses) of the page conditioned the knowledge a reader took from it. Printed letters were, after all,
1I2. Hooke, Posthumous Works, 18-19, 24, 34, 36, 42, 63-5, 138-48 (esp. 139-40); Mulligan, "Robert Hooke's 'Memoranda,'" 50-3. A possible inspiration for Hooke's scheme lay in the diverse systems still being proposed for commonplacing: see esp. Moss, Printed Commonplace-Books, 153, 226-30; Blair, "Humanist Methods in natural Philosophy"; Blair, Theater ofNature, 49-81, 166-79.

434

CHAPTER SIX

images of a sort, and this was how the imagination recognized them. His friend Joseph Moxon realized this. He exemplified it in his call for characters to be crafted along Vitruvian lines. 1l3 Exactly analogous problems of credit therefore attended engravings and woodcuts as were created by the printing of texts. And this was a conclusion applicable in general, not just in Hooke's own context. Corporeality, credit, and commerce were all implicated in the proper use of images. Were images to be trusted as truthful representations of the world? On what basis? 114 The issue was perhaps especially pertinent in a Protestant realm avowing emancipation from the imaginative manipulation allegedly facilitated by Catholic iconography and emblems. 115 Similar interpretative strategies to those deployed around texts were therefore called for in approaching images, including the investigation of personnel, places, and technologies associated with their production and distribution. Willughby's Historia Piscium, the natural history of fish that almost proved the Royal Society's undoing in the 1680s, was one example; the Atlas Gelestis of John Flamsteed, treated in chapter 8, was another. Both testified to the problems of funding, making, and believing engraved images of natural bodies. 116 Evelyn's Sculptura was partly intended as an answer to such questions. By enabling virtuosi to understand the engraving process, it aspired to help them rid pictorial representations of"Envy, and imposture." When even this book was challenged by a commercial engraver, as chapter 7 shows, the Society responded by moving to develop its own machineries of publication. A sizable community of practitioners existed that could be called upon to generate reproducible images of all kinds. As with the Stationers-but with less formality-this community had developed its own conventions ofcommerce and civility. Like the Stationers, too, these conventions repeatedly clashed with the concerns of men and women wishing to become authors. The engravers had their own patentees, monopolists, and, of course, pirates.

I13. Above, p. 89. See also Evelyn, Sculptura, I1-23, for a history of pictorial representation that described letters and images as enjoying a common origin and early history. I14. For the accreditation and counterfeiting of images, see Evelyn, Sculptura, 54, 62, 634,75,93-4,96,101-3, II?, 128-9. Evelyn cited Hevelius as a model of the gentleman knowledgeable enough to overcome the problem: 82-3. I15. E.g., Stafford, Artful Science. I16. Willughby's book is a particularly interesting case, remarkable for its participants' extensive reflections on the processes of collection, recording, negotiation, and imprinting involved in making trustworthy images. Those processes may be followed by the modern historian, since Willughby's collections of pictures drawn from his European travels, along with comments by Ray (the editor) and others, and proof sheets in various stages of correction, are stored at NUL Ms. MiLM25. These provide what is perhaps a unique opportunity to trace in detail the construction of standard images of creatures from a variety of sources. I hope to examine them in detail in future work.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

435

FIG. 6.13. William Hogarth's engraving celebrating the passage in 1735 of an Act against "the Tyranny Frauds & Piracies of Monopolising Dealers," 1754. (In the possession of the author.)

They had their own notions of propriety, just as flexible and controversial as those of the Stationers' "copy." Exasperated complainants discovered that plates could be amended to an indeterminate degree by such workers, so that in a realm of unauthorized reproduction the artist bade "farewel to Accuracy, Expression, [and] Invention." The unlucky ones ended up yoked to the piracy mill themselves, becoming "no better than the Lowest of Robbers." Thus the whole enterprise seemed dominated by "the Tyranny Frauds & Piracies of Monopolising Dealers" (fig. 6.13). It was a situation replete

43 6

CHAPTER SIX

with disturbing implications-for modern historians as well as contemporary readers, both being forced to rely on images the very creation of which cast doubt on their credit. ll7 As with texts, the credibility of pictorial reproductions could best be secured by manifesting clear control over every aspect of the reproductive process. Alexander Pitfield implied as much when he remarked that the images of dissections performed at the Academie des Sciences that he reproduced in 1688 "were not graved, till all those which were present at the Dissections found that they were wholly conformable to what they had seen." Novel techniques had to be developed for such a strategy to succeed, for, as Pitfield said, "in this the importance is not so much to represent well what is seen, as to see well what should be represented." Every author who saw an intricately designed draft for a frontispiece subjected to the caprice of an unlearned engraver knew as much. In the Royal Society, Pitfield and others drew upon the talented yet unsung Richard Waller. A protege of Hooke, Waller uniquely combined craft skill with the civility of a Society fellow. The most spectacular instance, however, was that of the Danzig astronomer Johannes Hevelius. Van Helden and Winkler show how Hevelius worked to create a "visual language" for his astronomy. An essential part of his enterprise was the establishment of credit in his engravings for users who might reside half a continent away. Hevelius tried to achieve this end by providing a complete, circumstantial account of their making. He covered the entire transit ofan observation from telescope to printed page, including such arcane subjects as lens grinding and the different rates of shrinkage in breadth and height of damp paper as it dried. Hevelius himself may not actually have done any engraving or printing, although it is quite possible that he did (his printer certainly observed the stars with him). But he did pay for and control these processes, and the credit of the engraver and
II7. Or, worse, the images might not exist at all. Pictorial representations oflabor, retailing, and similar activities (and of printing and bookselling in particular) were far more likely to be made in Continental Europe than in London; that is why those used in chapter 2 often display French, Dutch, or German scenes. It is hard to say exactly why, although an explanation will clearly rest on the different criteria by which the engraving and publishing communities of these different regions reached their creative decisions-criteria involving representations of skill, economy, credibility, and audience. In fact, the images used above were generally meant to be normative as well as representative. They have been used for this reason, as well as because they are the most accurate images of printing houses and bookshops available to us. Pictures ofexperiments being done are another, even more striking, example: these do not seem to have been published anywhere. See Case ofDesigners, Engravers, Etchers for a polemic against the London print trade and its corruption by monopolists and pirates, and below, pp. 6t5 - 6, for the consequences of alleged piracy in the case ofJohn Flamsteed's star charts. Schulze, Leselust, beautifully reproduces a wide range ofContinental images related to the reading and symbolic value of books, but not to their manufacture or commerce.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

437

printer was therefore to be "included in" his own. His images of the stars were stamped with the certificates "Observator sculpsit" (in Cometographia) or "Autor sculpsit" (in Selenographia).l18 These signaled that he was staking his reputation on a quite extraordinary claim to veracity. In Hevelius's books, the page was to be accounted a direct representation of the heavens. It was, however, possible to question Hevelius's images. Flamsteed referred to one instance. In his Mercurius in Sole Visus, Hevelius had displayed an engraving of the transit of Mercury across the Sun in 1661 that, he claimed, was of just this order of veracity. He had produced the seven recorded positions by marking them with a pin on a single sheet of paper onto which he had projected the face of the Sun (fig. 6.14). But Oldenburg communicated to him doubts about this image raised by Thomas Streete, who had observed the same transit in London with Huygens. Streete pointed out that the angle of Mercury's path displayed by Hevelius seemed to contradict Streete's own calculations based on accepted observations of the planet's angle to the ecliptic (fig. 6.15). Perhaps Hevelius had in fact constructed the printed picture not directly from observation, but by combining other sheets on which observed positions had been marked. Hevelius's first response was to insist again upon the observational veracity of the figure and to remark that the angle of Mercury's orbit could be obtained "mechanically" by constructions from his engraving (fig. 6.16). This failed to satisfy Streete, who now proposed further doubts about the viability of Hevelius's technique for obtaining truthful numbers. The necessary movement of the sheet of paper between each observation, he argued, meant that important angles must vary between each of the seven traces. Hevelius now saw that Streete was in effect directly questioning the truth of his account of the marking of these positions. He reaffirmed that he had noted them on the same sheet. He had appointed the vertical point of the Sun's limb, then referred the paper to that vertical in making each observation. This, he maintained, was a more direct and truthful method that any based on calculated figures. Since it relied on no prior information, it was an instantiation of the principle of nullius in verba. Yet, in true Royal Society tradition, he also cited witnesses to confirm that he had indeed acted as he said, and that the recorded observations accorded to those engraved in the book. This effectively ended the mild controversy, since the stakes of continued questioning were too high. As Flamsteed remarked, Streete's insinuation of a
u8. Evelyn, Sculptura, esp. sigs. A2'-A4'; Pitfield, Memoirs, sig. [brJ; Ezell, "Richard Waller," 214-22; Hevelius, Selenographia, 210 -15; Hevelius, Machina Gtlestis, 446 -7; Winkler and Van Helden, "Johannes Hevelius and the Visual Language of Astronomy"; Winkler and Van Helden, "Representing the Heavens." For the need for authors to oversee engravers' work, see Corbett and Lightblown, The Comely Frontispiece, I, 34-5,45.

FIG. 6.14. Hevelius's projection technique for observing solar rransits. Hevelius, Machina ClElestis. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.) FIG. 6.15. Huygens's portrayal of Mercury's rransit across the face of rhe Sun, observed in London with Thomas Srreete on 23 April/3 May 1661. Huygens, Oeuvres, III. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

'.e; .. .H"rit
E

_

-

·-{or.

2

M

/f·

C'yVnzrC{frl,M
&c

(l{NJ:'C(;

<8 e

HI

<;;DC{ <!7t'iJ:

FIG. 6.16. Hevelius's use of his technique for the direct representation of the heavens to show the transit of Mercury across the face of the Sun. Hevelius, Mercurius in Sole Visus. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

440

CHAPTER SIX

FIG. 6.17. Hooke's schema for the representation of knowledge, designed for ready apprehension by the imagination and retention in the memory. Applied in practice, the result would be pages coded by color as well as layout. Hooke, Posthumous Works. (By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.)

composite image must be reckoned "wide and different from the practise of that Judicious Observer." 119 Typography and engraving alike had to be seen in the context of the credit of their producers. Flamsteed himself found this to his cost, as chapter 8 shows. Meanwhile, Hooke took the provisions of his own recipe very seriously (fig. 6.17). He emphasized just these factors, for example, in championing projects for publication. Moses Pitt's English Atlas, which he strongly supported, was thus designed to present "a plaine simple deer and uncompounded Representation of the Object to the Sense," to "more easily imprint that idea the Deeper in the memory, which is the Principall use of such a work." 120 That he maintained this view so strongly should hardly be surprising, since Hooke based it on principles of mind and body that he felt to be of universal applicability. His efforts may be compared to those dediII9. Oldenburg, Correspondence, II, 182-9, 214-21, 300-309, 392-9; RGO Ms. 1.43, fols. 45'-49'; Flamsteed, Correspondence, I, 633-8. For another questioning of Hevelius's images, see Shapin, Social History ofTruth, 272-91. 120. BL Ms. SI. 1039. fols. 1'-2'.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

441

cated to the production of polyglot bibles, in which "the several Languages shall be printed in several Columns, whereby they may all be presented to the Readers view at once," to synoptic bibliographical guides from Gesner's onward, and to the affinity tables and similar devices deployed by chemical writers of the next century. All involved prolonged, dedicated, and active reflection on the importance of mise en page for the communication, reception, and practice of knowledge. 121 As Hooke himself declared in a lecture on geometry, given these principles it was essential to follow his mechanisms for "furnishing the Mind with the true grounds of Knowledge." They were not necessary just for experimental philosophy, however. All knowledge must be communicated in such a fashion, or else it could not truly be accounted knowledge. "We see it necessary, and practised in many other things where a good habit is to be acquired." As such, it was clearly essential in "Reading ... , and most other Manual Operations." 122
CONCLUSION

This chapter has utilized contemporary accounts of anatomy, the passions, philosophical method, and perception, in order to encourage a widening of the terms in which we view the practices and representations of reading in early modern England. The fact that uses of this material were remarkably diverse in the period, so that the treatment offered here has at times pursued them away from a narrow concentration on reading itself and into issues of education, knowledge, gender, religious faith, and politics, only reinforces its salience. Such a diversity ofapplication underscores the importance that historians should attach to the history of reading as both skill and representation. John Dryden suggested another use that underscores the point. Dryden insisted upon the importance of historiography because "it informs the understanding by the memory." Since mankind was "the same in all ages," and "agitated by the same passions," nothing could come to pass unless "some Presedent of the like nature has already been produc'd." It was an entirely conventional view, shared by many in Dryden's society. \23 The argument rested on assumptions about the natutal economy of the passions-an economy that contemporaries assumed to be universal and sempiternal. In
121. BriefDescription ofan Edition ofthe Bible; Propositions concerning the Printing ofthe Bible; Chartier, Order ofBooks, 61-88; Golinski, Science as Public Culture; Roberts, "Setting the Table"; Anderson, Between the Library and the Laboratory. For mise en page, see also Laufer, "Espaces du Livre," and Kroll, "Mise-en-Page." 122. Hooke, Posthumous WOrks, 70. 123. Levine, Battle ofthe Books, 274. Many other examples are listed in Champion, Pillars ofPriestcraft Shaken, 25, 35-40.

CHAPTER SIX

perhaps the most influential introduction to the reading of history, Degory Wheare thus urged that historicalliterarure imprinted images of characters on the mind, and thereby encouraged their emulation. "By a kind of WaxImages," Wheare told srudents, the rhetorical presentation ofpast characters could "help, excite and irritate our cold and languishing Memories." 124 Wheare thus defined history itself as a "Register and Explication of particular affairs, undertaken to the end that the memory of them may be preserved, and so Universals may be the more evidently confirm'd, by which we may be instructed how to live well and Happily." 125 This was very much the same kind of representation as that which informed Hooke's deployment of his own "register" at the Royal Society. This chapter began by asking what early modern men and women thought acrually happened when they read. They saw letters on a page through eyes that resembled the device known as the camera obscura, which conveyed images, through the body's animal spirits, onto the brain's semus communis. There imaginative and perceprual images combined, and animal spirits mingled and departed to drive the body's responses to both. The chapter traced the paths of these spirits along the channels increasingly discerned by anatomists, and demonstrated that their role was such that reading necessarily took place through a complex of what contemporaries called "passions." They knew a great deal about these entities, and were able to account for a wide variety of beliefs and actions in terms of their passionate states. Passions could be generated either by sensations or by internal bodily events. The latter was certainly the case during diseases, and physicians possessed recognized remedies for such conditions. More, Sedgwick, Hickes, and Smith capitalized on their experiences when they juxtaposed enthusiastic "visions" with passionate "vapours." This meant that reading partook of a problem of knowledge that was one of the most intractable to face early modern society. The discussion showed the necessity for an English subject of restraining his or her passions. On success in this effort depended the status of the individual as a reliable investigator and relater of truth. This applied in all spheres, but the chapter particularly stressed the importance of the passions in accounting for what hostile contemporaries called "enthusiasm." In the 1640s, especially, radical nonconformists, convinced of what they called their experimental faith, claimed direct insights from God. For the women among them, this conviction facilitated their pioneering of forms of authorship not seen before in England. But most authorities were antagonistic. What distinguished sec124. Wheare, Method and Order, 323-4; Universal Historical Bibliotheque, 2 (February 1686/7), 129. 125. Wheare, Method and Order, 15.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF READING

443

tarian "schism" from "necessary separation" (such as that of Canterbury from Rome), John Hales thought, was that the former rested on "passion or distemper." 126 This was a very widely held view indeed. Religious "enthusiasts" were thus classifiable in terms of their inability or unwillingness to restrain their passions in the context of their reading. Henry More and Meric Casaubon took great pains to specify the precise nature of their opponents' errors, and did so by recounting their own most striking reading experiences. Both elided typography and images in their tales. More stressed the importance of the imagination in creating apparent visions from visually striking pages. Casaubon agreed, but went further in urging the profound danger of abandoning the labor of critical, skeptical reading in a world of forgeries. Its neglect of the skills needed for this effort was why Casaubon opposed the program of the Royal Society. 127 That program-the establishment and promotion of experimental natural philosophy-is the subject of the following chapter.
126. Hales, Works, I, II6.
127. George Sinclair went further still. A Cartesian, he maintained, forced experiments into "compliance with his own fancies, [and] was not this to study Natural History, as Hereticks do the Scripture[?]": S[inclair], Hydrostaticks, 316. Such complaints should, however, be compared to the conduct of people such as Flamsteed, who refused to send a list of errata in his Doctrine ofthe Sphere to Molyneux because the presence of unknown errors would force the reader to work through-and hence properly understand-the mathematical argument of the book. Molyneux responded by declaring that his weakness in mathematics was such that unless Flamsteed became more forthcoming, he would cease to read it altogether: he "should read with fear and distrust, and that is to read in Pain and not in Pleasure." Southampton CRO Ms. DIM 11r, fols. 57'-59'.

