Special  Issues:  ga114 Date  Published:  7/30/1996 www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=45 Arthur  and  Marilouise  Kroker,  Editors

The  History  of  Communication  Media
Friedrich  Kittler

Introduction
What  follows  is  on  attempt  to  discuss  the  history  of  communication  technologies  -  as  far  as  this is  humanly  possible  -  in  general  terms.  The  objective  is  ultimately  the  outline  of  a  scientific history  of  the  media  -  an  outline  for  the  simple  reason  that  media  sciences  is  a  new  field  of research  which  would  not  exist  had  it  not  been  for  the  triumphal  advance  of  modern  information technologies.  This  is  why  such  a  history  comes  up  against  methodological  and  practical problems. One  practical  problem  is  that  communications  technologies  themselves  are  documented  to  a far  lesser  extent  or  are  far  less  accessible  than  their  contents  vide  the  manner  in  which  the intelligence  services  have  remained,  despite  their  frequently  decisive  role  in  wars  (to  quote  the last  head  of  the  Wehrmacht  intelligence  service,  "the  Cinderella  of  military-historical  research"  1 Then  there  is  the  methodological  problem  posed  by  the  conundrum  of  whether  the  now  so  self- evident  term  "communication"  can  properly  be  used  in  connection  with  times  and  locations which  manifestly  were  characterised  by  other  terminology  (drawn  from  mythology  or  religion).  At any  rate  its  enthronement  in  philosophy  was  based  in  John  Locke's  "Essay  on  Human Understanding"  on  the  scarcely  generalisable  assumption  that  communication  means  the rendering  into  speech  of  perceived  ideas  and  consequently  the  linking  of  isolated  individuals through  "bonds  of  language".2  The  only  trouble  is  that  philosophy  omits  to  enquire  how,  without language,  people  are  supposed  to  have  arrived  at  their  ideas  and  conceptions  in  the  first  place. Liberation  from  this  unfathomable  confusion  came  only  with  a  technical  concept  of  information which,  since  Shannon's  "Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication",  avoids  any  reference  to ideas  or  meanings  and  thus  to  people. Information  systems  in  the  narrowest  sense  of  the  word  are,  it  is  true,  optimised  in  terms  of  the storage,  processing  and  transmission  of  messages.  Communication  systems  on  the  other  hand because  in  addition  to  messages  they  also  control  the  traffic  of  persons  and  goods  3  comprise  all kinds  of  media  (in  McLuhan's  analysis)  from  road  systems  to  language.4  There  is  nonetheless good  reason  to  analyse  communication  systems  in  the  same  way  as  information  systems. Ultimately,  communication  too  depends  on  control  signals,  the  more  so  the  more  complex  its working;  even  the  triad  of  "things  communicated"  -  information,  persons,  goods  -  can  be reformulated  in  terms  of  information  theory: Firstly,  messages  are  essentially  commands  to  which  persons  are  expected  to react  [this  definition  in  the  original  German  is  based  on  the  etymology  of  the German  word  "Nachrichten"  -  Tr.]. Secondly,  as  systems  theory  teaches,  persons  are  not  objects  but  addresses

which  "make  possible  the  assessment  of  further  communications".5 Thirdly,  as  ethnology  since  Mauss  and  Levi-Strauss  has  taught,  goods represent  data  in  an  order  of  exchange  between  said  persons. However  if  data  make  possible  the  operation  of  storage,  addresses  that  of  transmission  and commands  that  of  data  processing,  then  every  communication  system,  as  the  alliance  of  these three  operations,  is  an  information  system.  It  depends  solely  on  whether  the  three  operations  are implemented  in  physical  reality  to  what  extent  such  a  system  becomes  an  independent communication  technology.  In  other  words  the  history  of  these  technologies  comes  to  an  end when  machines  not  only  handle  the  transmission  of  addresses  and  data  storage,  but  are  also able,  via  mathematical  algorithms,  to  control  the  processing  of  commands.  It  is  thus  no coincidence  that  not  until  the  start  of  the  computer  age,  that  is,  when  all  operations  of communication  systems  had  been  mechanised,  was  Shannon  able  to  describe  a  formal  model of  information.  This  model  comprises,  as  we  know,  five  connected  stages  6: Firstly  there  is  an  information  source  which  selects  one  message  per  unit  of time  from  the  either  enumerable-discrete  or  innumerable-continuous  quantity  of possible  messages. Secondly  this  source  supplies  one  or  more  transmitters  which  process  the message  via  suitable  coding  into  a  technical  signal  (something  which  is  quite impossible  in  the  discrete  case  without  intermediate  data  storage). Thirdly  these  transmitters  feed  a  channel  which  safeguards  the  transmission  of the  signal  in  space  and/or  time  from  physical  noise  and/or  hostile  interference. Fourthly  these  channels  lead  to  one  or  more  receivers  which  reconstitute  the message  from  the  signal  by  subjecting  it  to  a  decoding  algorithm  inverse  to  that of  the  transmitter,  so  that  finally, Fifthly,  the  retranslated  message  arrives  at  the  address  of  an  information  drain.7 This  elegant  model,  however,  cannot  simply  be  applied  to  the  factual  history  of  communication technology,  not  least  because  it  lays  no  claim  whatever  to  historicity.  Instead  of  simply  accepting Shannon's  five  black  boxes,  as  has  become  customary  in  linguistics  and  the  humanities  too,  it seems  more  important  and  more  rewarding  to  trace  back  through  history  how  their  evolution must  have  proceeded  in  the  first  place.  Taking  Luhmann's  premise  that  communication technologies  provide  a  "first-rate  demarcation  of  epochs  magnetising  all  else"  8,  it  is  reasonable to  conclude  that  the  historical  transition  from  orality  to  the  written  word  equated  to  a  decoupling of  interaction  and  communication,  and  the  transition  from  writing  to  the  technical  media  indeed  to a  decoupling  of  communication  and  information.  What  we  have  here,  therefore,  is  a  process  of evolution  which  has  come  to  a  conclusion  only  in  the  theory  and  practice  of  an  information  which corresponds  to  the  exact  opposite  of  the  energetic  concept  of  entropy.9 This  evolutionary  process  gives  us  the  possibility  of  dividing  the  history  of  communication media  into  two  main  blocks.  The  first  block  deals  with  the  history  of  writing  and  itself  divides  into a  section  on  scripts  and  one  on  printing.  The  second  block  on  technical  media  will  take  us  from the  basic  invention  of  telegraphy  via  the  analog  media  to,  finally,  the  digital  medium  of  the computer.

A.  Writing
1.  Script The  history  of  the  literate  cultures,  whose  "medium"  customarily  also  divides  history  from prehistory  10,  is  determined  by  two  series  of  variables.  The  first  series  stands  in  relation  to  what philosophy  since  the  Stoics  has  recognised,  or  failed  to  recognise,  as  a  reference:  To  the  extent that  the  content  of  a  medium  is  always  another  medium  11  and  that  of  writing  (even  for  Aristotle 12)  is  speech,  scripts  can  be  classified  according  to  whether  they  process  everyday  languages into  pictographs  or  syllabic  or  phonemic  signs.13  However  to  the  extent  that  the  medium  of writing,  probably  for  the  first  time,  also  couples  storage  and  transmission,  inscription  and  post, then  physical  variables  relating  to  writing  implements  and  writing  surface  decide  as  to  the  space and  time  frame  of  the  communication.  These  variables  dictate  the  time  needed  for  transmitting and  receiving,  the  permanence  or  erasability  of  what  is  written  and,  not  least,  whether  the information  is  transportable  or  not. The  first  series  of  variables  controls  developments  between  speech  and  writing:  degrees  of memory  performance,  degrees  of  grammatical  analysability,  the  possibilities  of  coupling  speech with  other  media.  As  an  independent  field  of  anthropological  media  research  it  can,  for  our purposes,  be  left  to  one  side. The  second  series  of  variables  has  received  considerably  less  attention,  possibly  because  it  is so  material  in  nature.  And  yet  it  is  such  simple  things  as  writing  implements  and  writing  surfaces that  determine  the  gain  in  power  in  which  the  introduction  of  scripts  always  results.  If  priests were  interested  in  the  storage  of  addresses,  that  is,  of  gods  or  the  dead,  for  a  maximum  length  of time;  if  merchants  were  interested  in  the  storage  of  goods  over  a  maximum  length  of  time  and  in the  transportation  of  goods  over  maximum  distances  and  finally  warriors  in  the  transmission  of commands  over  maximum  distances  in  the  shortest  possible  time,  then  the  oldest  scripts  which were  produced  some  3000  years  BC  in  Sumeria  and  Egypt  had  economic  and  religious functions.  In  warrior  circles  however,  that  which  military  historians  call  the  oral  "stone  age  of  the command  flow"  ended  only  with  Napoleon.14  Apart  from  commands  passed  from  mouth  to  ear there  were  only  the  semiotic  use  of  fire  for  signaling  purposes  and  fast  but  equally  oral messengers,  whose  record  was  probably  held  by  Genghis  Khan.15 The  first  manifestations  of  script  are  of  course  inscriptions  without  a  writing  surface  in  the accepted  sense.  Two-dimensional  rolls  of  seals  or  stamps  in  the  medium  of  clay  enabled  goods to  be  given  addresses  indicating  their  owner  or  their  contents.  Stone  inscriptions  named  the deceased  occupants  of  tombs.16  As  signals  in  the  absence  of  the  source  of  information,  in  other words  through  the  decoupling  of  communication  and  interaction,  inscriptions  opened  up, according  to  Jan  Assmann,  the  possibility  in  principle  of  literature.17 By  contrast  an  administration  of  those  great  river  irrigation  systems  in  which  cities  and  high cultures  blossomed  presupposed  the  transition  from  inscribed  tablets  to  skillfully  crafted  and optimised  transportable  writing  surfaces:  bamboo  and  mulberry  in  China,  unfired  clay  or  clay fired  for  storage  purposes  in  Mesopotamia,  papyrus  as  the  monopoly  of  the  Nile  delta.  Thus  the same  rivers  on  which  the  traffic  of  slave  labour  and  goods  flowed  simultaneously  carried  (on  the basis  of  a  calendar  or  goniometric  mathematics)  the  commands  of  water  allocation  and  the harvesting  of  products.18  The  same  cities  that  translated  the  anthropological  schema  of  head, hand  and  torso  into  the  architectonic  schema  of  palaces,  streets  and  storehouses  19  needed

scripts  for  the  processing  transmission  and  storage  of  their  data.  This  establishment  of  a  unified area  is  reflected  in  the  texts  themselves  as  a  spatialisation  of  speech:  since  its  very  beginnings writing  has  yielded  lists  without  context  which  bear  no  traces  of  oral  or  written  communication networks,  but  for  this  precise  reason  no  longer  have  any  equivalent  in  everyday  situations.20 By  contrast,  outreachings  beyond  the  unified  area  -  the  founding  of  empires  in  other  words  - only  became  possible  when  states  in  both  the  ancient  world  and  the  modern  took  over  control  of the  warrior  messengers  and  additionally,  in  the  ancient  world  since  1200  BC,  after  the  crossing of  two  breeds  of  horse,  made  messengers  and  warriors  mobile.21  In  classical  times,  "There was,"  in  the  immortal  words  of  Herodotus,  "nothing  swifter  on  earth"  than  the  alliance  of  media which,  under  the  Achaemenides,  combined  Persia's  Royal  Way  with  a  mounted  staging messenger  service  to  carry  "urgent  messages  at  a  fast  trot,  in  the  face  of  all  natural  adversities, from  rider  to  rider,  from  stage  to  stage.22  Angareion,  the  Persian  name  of  this  military  mail,  is  the root  of  the  Greek  word  for  messenger  and  consequently  of  all  Christian  angels. The  Greek  polis  had  but  one  script  to  set  against  a  communications  empire  such  as  the Persian,  but  in  contrast  to  oriental  bureaucracies  it  was  entirely  susceptible  *of  orality.  Firstly  the Greek  alphabet  (from  Indo-European  necessities  and  because  it  developed  in  the  course  of commercial  and  translation  intercourse  with  semitic  consonant  scripts)  turned  redundant consonants  into  vowels,  thus  performing  the  first  total  analysis  of  a  spoken  language  -  and  in principle  of  all  such.23  The  fact  that  vowel  signs  for  the  first  time  encoded  prosodic-musical elements  of  speech  permitted  of  a  musical  notation,  and  in  the  Pythagorean  school  for  the simple  reason  that  Greek  letters  also  possessed  numerical  values  24,  a  mathematisation  of music,  to  the  extent  that  this  remained  a  matter  of  abstract  intervals. Secondly,  the  triumphal  progress  of  the  vocalic  alphabet  seems  less  to  be  the  result  of  an overestimated  degree  of  innovation  rather  than  of  the  unambiguity  of  its  phoneme  allocation. This  minimised  the  effort  required  for  literacy  and  thus  transferred  palace  and  temple  secrets  to the  public  domain.25  It  became  possible  for  literature  firstly  to  incorporate  oral  mnemonics  (such as  airs  or  rhapsodies)  and  later  also  prose.26  Athenian  tyrants  founded  the  first  public  library;  the bookworm  Euripides  became  the  "first  great  reader"  among  writers.27 These  ancient  scrolls  got  their  Biblical  name  from  a  papyrus-exporting  city  in  Phoenicia  whose place  was  taken  as  of  5O0  BC  by  the  Nile  delta.  The  Imperium  Romanum  too,  after  the  conquest of  Egypt,  based  its  command  network  -  which  is  what  the  empire  was  -  on  a  combination  of mounted  staging  messengers,  madeup  military  roads  and  easily  transportable  papyrus.  The empire,  in  other  words,  combined  despotic  transmission  mechanisms  with  a  democratic alphabet.  The  cursus  publicus  which  Augustus  set  up,  with  overnight  stations  at  distances  of  40 kilometres  and  staging  posts  at  around  12  kilometres,  exclusively  for  officials  and  legions  28 became,  despite  this,  or  perhaps  precisely  because  of  it,  the  crystallisation  point  for  European towns.  In  combination  with  beacon  telegraphy  at  sensitive  frontiers,  a  state  postal  service,  which was  faster  than  the  fastest  ships  and  was  not  excelled  until  Napoleon,  transmitted  imperial power  as  such:  "Caesarum  est  per  arbem  terrae  litteras  missitare"  29,  as  a  late  Roman  writer  has it  -  "It  is  the  office  of  emperors  to  send  written  commands  across  the  world."  In  comparison  with this  perfect  transmission  medium  for  said  world  and  Caesar's  news-sheet  distribution  in  the  city of  Rome,  data  storage  -  even  if  there  was  an  imperial  officium  sacrae  memoriae  since  Hadrian  - remained  technically  retarded. Papyrus  may  be  light,  but  it  is  fragile  and  impermanent.  It  could  only  be  stored  in  rolls  and  read

with  two  hands.  In  the  opinion  of  Alan  Turing,  the  first  computer  theorist,  "it  must  have  taken some  time  to  look  up  references  in  such  volumes".30  It  was  not  until  the  arrival  of  the  codex  in parchment,  used  first  by  the  library  of  Persimmon  for  circumventing  the  Egyptian  papyrus monopoly,  and  by  Christians  since  140  AD,  that  indexing  by  location,  sheets  and  finally  sides, became  possible.  Books,  which  were  durable,  erasable  (as  in  the  palimpsest)  and  addressable with  special  pages  (indices)  were  worth  their  extra  weight  and  extra  cost.  They  decoupled increasingly  cursory  reading  from  the  laboriousness  and  slowness  of  orality.  When  Bishop Ambrose  of  Milan  (according  to  the  testimony  of  his  best-known  disciple)  read  a  codex  "his  eyes swept  over  the  pages  extracting  the  essence  of  the  meaning  while  he  himself  remained  silent".31 In  the  codex,  the  transportable,  addressable  and  interpretable  scripts  of  former  nomads,  the Jews  and  Arabs,  vanquished  the  immobility  of  statues  and  temples  of  the  gods. The  decline  of  the  cursus  publicus  and  the  Islamic  incorporation  of  Egypt,  which  also  led  to  the destruction  of  the  great  ancient  library,  cut  off  Western  Europe  from  papyrus  imports.  What  was left  was  the  agricultural  product,  parchment,  on  which  monks  were  constrained  to  copy  the censored  Christian  version  of  what  was  contained  on  papyrus,  while  in  the  Byzantine  Empire  the flaw  of  written  commands  from  all  past  emperors  coagulated  into  the  legislation  of  the  Codex. Through  such  bridgings  or  compressions  of  time  a  translatio  studii  was  enabled  to  take  place; but  the  translatio  imperii  presupposed  new  orders  of  distance  and  thus  more  accessible  writing surfaces. In  the  13th  century,  paper,  imported  from  China  via  Baghdad,  arrived  in  Europe,  where  it  was further  developed  by  cities  of  the  linen  trade  and  the  new  windmills  and  watermills  into  rag- paper.  This  writing  surface  was  central  to  the  rise  of  the  universities  which,  with  their incorporated  book-copying  departments  and  postal  networks  broke  the  storage  monopoly  of  the monasteries.  And  at  the  same  time  it  was  central,  in  combination  with  the  Indian  numerical system  imported  via  Arabia,  to  the  rise  of  trading  cities.32  The  important  thing  in  this  context  was not  simply  the  well  known  invention  of  double-entry  bookkeeping  but,  above  all,  a  mathematical notation  which  for  the  first  time  brought  independence  from  the  numerous  workaday  languages. Greeks,  when  adding  two  numbers  together,  had  said  kai,  and  Romans  et;  since  the  15th century  however  we  have  had  plus  and  minus,  as  mute  as  they  are  international,  as  signs  for mathematical  operators. 2.  Printing Gutenberg's  invention  of  printing  using  movable  letters  developed  from  book-spine  stamps which,  in  contrast  to  their  predecessors  in  China  and  Korea,  functioned  both  alphabetically  and (after  the  disappearance  of  ligatures)  discretely,  may  not  have  been  a  revolution  of  the magnitude  of  the  codex  -  but  it  met  the  demand  awakened  by  paper.  As  "the  first  assembly  line in  the  history  of  technology"  33,  printing  potentiated  the  data  processing  capacity  of  books. Because  all  copies  of  an  edition,  in  contrast  to  manual  copies,  had  the  same  texts,  woodcuts  and engravings  in  the  same  places,  they  could  be  accessed  via  unified  and  for  the  first  time alphabetical  indexes.  This  addressing  using  page  numbers,  titles  and,  since  Leibniz, alphabetical  library  catalogues  34,  put  the  communication  system  which  is  science  on  its reference  basis,  while  book  illustrations  free  of  copying  errors  formed  the  basis  of  engineering.35 Not  without  reason  could  Vasari  boast  that  Italy  had  discovered  perspective,  as  enabling  the production  of  technically  accurate  drawings,  in  the  same  year  as  Gutenberg  invented typography.

New  media  do  not  make  old  media  obsolete;  they  assign  them  other  places  in  the  system.  Thus because  printing  now  reproduced  the  rhetorical-musical  performances  at  tournaments  as literature  and  fictions  of  the  authors,  the  physical  techniques  of  these  tournaments  appear (according  to  Gumbrecht's  thesis)  to  have  been  transmuted  into  silent,  measurable  disciplines.36 Equally,  it  was  only  as  a  development  within  typography  that  the  intrinsic  value  of  handwriting emerged,  the  individuality  of  the  hand  taking  the  place  of  seals  on  letters  and  documents  and which  became  the  domain  of  a  state  system  of  post  and  police.  The  first  state  postal  systems  of early  modernity  were,  after  the  fashion  of  the  Roman  imperial  system,  still  reserved  for  military and  diplomatic  networks  and  protected  from  interception  by  a  cryptography  whose  rise  began with  Vieta's  algebraic  encoding  of  alphabetical  and  numerical  signs.37  On  the  other  hand,  the territorial  states,  controlled  extensively  by  post  and  firearms,  opened  up  their  networks  to  a private  traffic  which  they  also  monopolised  through  their  sovereign  right  of  posts.  When commercial  correspondents  were  included  in  the  public  postal  network  after  1600,  newspapers and  journals  came  into  being;  when  the  transport  of  persons  was  also  included  after  1650,  the post-coach  networks  were  established  as  a  scheduled  service.38  However  the  oft-quoted structural  transformation  from  the  aristocratic  to  the  middle-class  publicness,  whose  travels  and letters,  printed  pamphlets  and  newspaper  critiques  are  supposed  to  have  undermined  the  old power  system  of  Europe,  never  took  place.39  Even  without  its  consistent  control  through  secret cabinets  and  print  censorship  the  middle-class  publicness  remained  an  artefact  of  mercantile states,  whose  new  post  office  provided  half  the  budget  and  half  the  war  chest.40  Only  in  the intimacy  of  family  circles  did  the  "addiction  to  reading"  of  the  so-called  public  41  promote  a record  rise  in  national-language  belles-lettres  which  compensated  for  the  "loss  of  sensuality"  42 with  virtual  effects  on  readers'  senses,  thus  presaging  future  media  technologies.43 This  mediatisation  of  the  printed  word  presumably  had  its  basis  in  a  routine  light  reading  which was  no  longer  a  privilege  of  the  elite,  as  in  Saint  Ambrose's  time,  but  which  paved  the  way  for democracy  through  compulsory  schooling  and  general  literacy.  But  precisely  this  effortless reading  triggered  a  new  systemic  problem.  Because,  unlike  parchment  codices,  printed  books are  storage  devices  having  no  possibility  of  erasure,  there  was,  around  1800,  (to  quote  Fichte) "no  branch  of  knowledge  on  which  a  surfeit  of  books  is  not  available".44  As  a  result  literature  and science  had  to  revamp  their  transmission  and  receiving  techniques:  away  from  the  literalness  of quotes  from  the  scholarly  elite,  and  rhetorical  mnemonics,  towards  an  interpretative  approach which  reduced  the  quantity  of  printed  data  to  its  essence,  in  other  words  to  a  smaller  quantity  of data.  The  consequence  for  the  communication  system  that  is  science,  since  Humboldt's  reform, was  lectures  without  textbooks,  seminars  as  exercises  in  interpretation  and  the  rise  at universities  of  a  philosophy  whose  absolute  "spirit"  preserved  only  the  "remembrance"  of  all previous  forms  of  knowledge  and  of  its  own  textbook,  thus  becoming  the  hermeneutic "silhouette"  of  the  totality  of  books.45 In  the  real  world  this  mediatisation  of  writing  amounted  to  its  industrial  revolution.  In  place  of Gutenberg's  enumerable  combinations  came,  in  practical  terms  too,  a  calculus  of  infinites: endless  paper  machines  replaced,  as  of  1800,  the  discrete  formats  and  moulded  sheets;  pulp papers  from  America's  seemingly  inexhaustible  forests,  this  material  basis  of  all  mass  print material  since  1850,  took  the  place  of  rag.  And  finally  the  typewriter  and  have,  since  1880, levelled  out  the  difference  between  writing  and  printing  46,  thus  opening  up  the  floodgates  of modern  literature.47  It  was  Mallarme  who  first  offered  the  solution  of  reducing  literature  to  its lexical  meaning,  the  twenty-six  letters,  and  thus  not  competing  with  other  media  at  all.

B.  Technical  Media
Unlike  writing,  technical  media  do  not  utilise  the  code  of  a  workaday  language.  They  make  use of  physical  processes  which  are  faster  than  human  perception  and  are  only  at  all  susceptible  of formulation  in  the  code  of  modern  mathematics. 1.  Telegraphy  and  Analog  Technology Self-evidently  there  must  always  have  been  technical  media,  because  any  sending  of  signals using  acoustic  or  visual  means  is  in  itself  technical.  However  in  preindustrial  times  channels such  as  smoke  signals  or  fire  telegraphy  which  exploited  the  speed  of  light,  or  bush  telegraphs and  calling  chains  making  use  of  the  speed  of  sound  were  only  subsystems  of  an  everyday language.  The  beacon  signal  from  Troy  to  Mycenae  with  which  Aeschylus  introduces  the  literary genre  of  tragedy  announced  in  one  single  bit  the  fall  of  the  besieged  fortress  although  that depended  on  prior  arrangement.48  On  the  other  hand  it  remains  questionable  whether  a  form  of telegraphy  which  according  to  Polybios  was  capable  of  encoding  the  Greek  alphabet  into  five times  five  light  signals  and  thus  transmitting  random  sets  ever  saw  service.49 Information  rates  which  exceeded  all  performance  limits  of  writing  were  first  achieved  as  a result  of  the  necessity  for  command  flow  in  conscripted  mass  armies  and  wars  waged  with standardised  weaponry.  It  was  one  and  the  same  to  Lakanai,  the  politician  who  presented  the revolutionary  France  of  1793  with  an  elementary  school  system  and  a  literary  copyright  law  who one  year  later  persuaded  the  national  assembly  to  build  optical  telegraphy  lines.  As  the  official reason  for  this  revolution  the  argument  was  pressed  into  service  that,  in  large  nation-states,  only Chappe's  optical  telegraph  could  make  possible  that  democratic  election  process  which Rousseau  had,  as  we  know,  picked  up  from  the  city-state  of  Geneva.  With  Napoleon  however,  a less  public  but  exclusive  use  of  the  optical  telegraph  network  gave  rise  to  a  strategy  which  finalIy released  wars  from  the  stone  age  of  command  flow.  Independently-operating  divisions  were able  to  fight  on  several  fronts  at  the  same  time  because  newly-created  general  staffs  imposed their  cartographic  knowledge  by  telegraph  on  the  actual  ground.50 Telegraphy  thus  separated  literary  publicness  and  military  secrecy  at  the  same  historic moment,  since  publicness  was  transferred  from  elites  to  entire  populations.  A  new  elite  of engineering  schools  and  general  staffs  finally  discovered  in  the  1809  war  their  new,  to  all  intents and  purposes,  secret  medium  of  electricity.  With  the  move  of  telegraphy  from  optics  to  direct current,  not  only  did  the  human  and  therefore  unreliable,  relay  stations  disappear,  but  also Claude  Chappe's  grand  total  of  98  signs.  The  Morse  code  with  its  dots  and  dashes  and  pauses put  an  economy  of  signs  into  practice  which  Leibniz  had  previously  come  up  with  in  expressly typographical  theory  in  the  form  of  his  binary  code.51  The  electric  telegraph,  optimised  on  the basis  of  letter  frequency  and  charged  by  the  number  of  words,  was  the  first  step  on  the  road  to information  technology. In  terms  of  organisation  and  technology  too,  telegraphy  had  world-wide  repercussions.  For absolutely  the  first  time,  information  was  decoupled,  in  the  form  of  a  massless  flow  of electromagnetic  waves,  from  communication.  Remote  telegraphic  control  via  landline  made possible  a  systematic  railway  network.52  Railways  made  possible  an  accelerated  traffic  in  goods and  persons  53  which,  from  the  time  of  the  American  Civil  War  onward,  was  also  subject,  for military  purposes,  to  telegraphic  command.54  However,  in  the  form  of  goods  and  people  traffic, the  post  lost  two  of  its  traditional  functions.  It  was  forced  to  become  a  pure  information

technology  based  on  the  principles  of  house  numbers  and  letterboxes,  prepayment  with  stamps and  the  world  postal  union.55 This  detachment  from  the  ground  whose  distances  (as  in  synchronous  mathematical topography)  are,  in  contrast  to  all  pre-modern  postal  systems,  no  longer  calculated  because  only absolute  speed  counts,  brought  internationality:  from  the  stock  exchange  reports  of  world  trade and  the  telegraph  agencies  of  the  world  press,  to  colonial  empires  which,  like  the  British  Empire, were  founded  on  a  "fleet  in  being"  and  consequently  on  a  global  undersea  cable  monopoly.56 Technical  repercussions  of  telegraphy  as  information  time  made  discrete,  were  consequential inventions  which  paradoxically  also  processed  precisely  the  continuous  signal  sources.  Of  these I  shall  pass  over  the  analog  medium  of  photography  which  requires  a  treatment  of  its  own  and mention  only  the  telephone,  gramophone  record  and  film. Bell's  telephone,  the  most  lucrative  single  patent  of  all  time,  came  about  in  1876  not  by  any means  in  its  familiar  function,  but  in  the  course  of  an  attempt  to  transmit  several  messages  over  a single  telegraph  cable  at  the  same  time.  In  exactly  the  same  way  only  a  year  later  Edison's phonograph  emerged  as  a  spin-off  from  an  attempt  to  increase  the  throughput  rate  of  telegraph cables.  And  finally  Muybridge's  scientific  serial  photographs  which,  in  1895,  after  the  invention  of Maltese  cross  and  celluloid  paved  the  way  for  cinema,  were  triggered  by  electric  telegraph relays. Film  and  gramophone,  these  mass-reproducible  competitors  to  Edison's  phonographs,  made  it possible  to  store  optical  and  acoustical  data  as  such.  Because  analog  media  underbid,  first mechanically  and  subsequently  electrically,  the  perceptual  thresholds  determined  by  Fechner, they  can  recognise  in  speech  phonemes  and  musical  intervals  -  which  is  where  the  Greek analysis  as  their  being  the  final  alphabetical  elements  stopped  -  complex  frequency  mixtures which  are  open  to  a  further,  and  since  Fourier,  mathematical,  analysis.  The  modern  fundamental concept  of  frequency  57,  which  since  Euler  governs  probability  calculation,  music  and  optics alike,  has  replaced  the  arts  with  technical  media.  This  physics  in  the  simulation  process  of  the real  is  no  longer  partnered  in  the  reception  process  by  a  language-based  mnemonics  or pedagogy,  but  by  a  sensory  physiology  which  has  guaranteed  the  media  their  world-wide  and, thanks  to  Shannon's  measure  of  information,  calculable  success.58  At  the  same,  time  a knowledge  gap  between  unconscious  media  effects  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  innovatory  thrusts on  the  other,  (which  since  Edison's  first  laboratory  are  also  plannable)  has  emerged  which, despite  the  participation  of  women  in  telegraph,  telephone  and  typewriter  operations  59  is inimical  to  the  general  development  of  literacy  and  absolutely  rules  out  communication  on communication. A  prominent  role  in  this  turning-point,  whose  significance  is  probably  equalled  only  by  the invention  of  writing  60,  was  taken  by  Maxwell's  electromagnetic  field  equations  and  their experimental  substantiation  by  Heinrich  Hertz.  Since  Christmas  1906,  when  Fessenden's  radio transmitter  broadcast  low-frequency  random  events  as  they  occur  as  amplitude  or  frequency modulation  of  a  high  frequency,  there  exist  non-material  channels.  Since  1906,  when  de  Forest developed,  from  Edison's  light  bulb,  the  controllable  valve,  information  is  open  to  any  kind  of amplification  and  manipulation.  The  valve  radio,  developed  as  wireless  telephony  for  breaking the  imperial  cable  monopoly,  first  of  all  made  the  new  weapons  systems  of  the  first  World  War, the  aeroplane  and  the  tank,  both  mobile  and  dirigible  by  remote  control  61,  and  after  the  end  of the  war,  was  applied  to  the  civilian  populations.62

In  the  guise  of  a  "secondary  orality"  63,  bypassing  the  written  word,  radio  had  the  effect  of standardising  unwritten  languages,  primarily  through  world-wide  short-wave  broadcasting 64,thus  transforming  colonised  tribal  associations  into  independent  nations.65  In  the  same  way the  telephone,  in  its  progress  from  the  direct  dialling  system  via  frequency  multiplex  to  satellite links,  has  made  possible  the  non-hierarchical  networking  firstly  of  cities  and  ultimately  of  the "global  village".66  Yet  the  publicly  accessible  wavebands  remain,  despite  their  critical overcrowding  67,  only  fractions  of  a  frequency  spectrum  which,  from  long-wave  broadcasting  to the  decimetre  radar,  exercises  governmental  or  military  control  functions  and  taps  all  public wavebands  for  the  secret  services.68 The  electrification  of  sensory  input  data  through  transducers  and  sensors  enabled  the entertainments  industry  to  couple  analog  storage  media  firstly  with  one  another  and  secondly with  transmission  media.  The  sound  film  combined  optical  and  acoustic  memories;  radio,  before the  introduction  of  the  tape-recorder,  largely  transmitted  gramophone  records;  the  first  television systems,  prior  to  the  development  of  electronic  cameras,  scanned  feature  films.  Thus  the  content of  entertainment  media  always  remains  another  medium  which,  in  this  way,  they  serve  to promote. But  all  these  couplings  of  technologies  which  are  already  individually  standardised,  even though  they  gave  birth  to  aesthetic  forms  from  the  radio  play  and  electronic  music  to  the videoclip,  have  one  decisive  deficiency:  there  is  no  general  standard  which  regulates  their control  and  reciprocal  translation.  This  is  precisely  the  point  at  which  the  heroes  and  heroines  of Benjamin's  theory  of  media  came  to  the  rescue  in  the  form  of  editors  in  film  studios  and  sound engineers  for  tape  with  their  celebrated  but  strictly  manual  montage  techniques.69  The  rendering obsolete  of  this  human  intervention  and  the  automation  of  a  general  standard  was  reserved  for digital  technology. 2.  Digital  Technology Digital  technology  functions  like  an  alphabet  but  on  a  numerical  basis.  It  replaces  the continuous  functions  into  which  the  analog  media  transform  input  data,  which  are  generally  also continuous,  with  discrete  scannings  at  points  in  time  as  equidistant  as  possible,  in  the  same  way that  the  24  film  exposures  per  second,  or  at  a  much  higher  frequency  since  the  Nipkow  screen television  did  before.  This  measurement,  followed  by  evaluation  in  the  binary  number  system,  is the  precondition  for  a  general  media  standard. According  to  the  scanning  theorem  of  Nyquist  and  Shannon,  any  and  every  form  of  signal, provided  it  is  frequency-range-limited  intrinsically  or  through  filtering,  can  be  bi-univocally reconstructed  from  scanned  values  of  at  least  twice  the  frequency.70  The  quantisation  noise which  necessarily  arises  in  the  process  can  also,  in  contrast  to  the  physically-determined  noise of  analog  systems,  be  minimised  to  any  degree  simply  because  it  obeys  the  laws  of  a  digital system.71 It  was  in  1936  that  Turing's  universal  discrete  machine  stated  the  principle  of  all  digital technology.  Extrapolating  or  reducing  the  equally  discrete  typewriter  72,  it  consisted  simply  of  an endless  paper  tape,  the  idea  of  which  goes  back  to  1800.  On  this  "paper  machine"  for  data storage,  a  write/read/erase  head  for  data  processing  could  write  the  binary  signs  0  and  1  while  a transport  device  for  data  addressing  made  it  possible  to  access  the  neighbouring  signs  right  and left.  Turing  proved  however  that  this  elementary  machine,  because  by  contrast  to  the  noisy

Laplace  universe  it  knows  a  finite  number  of  states,  is  equal  not  only  to  any  mathematician  but solves  all  (in  Hilbert's  sense)  decidable  problems  of  mathematics  through  simulation  of  any  other correctly-programmed  machine.73 Thus  the  Turing  machine  concluded  in  its  universality  all  developments  for  the  storing,  indexing and  processing  of  both  alphabetical  and  numerical  data.  In  the  alphabetical  field  these developments  had  led  from  lists  and  catalogues,  via  the  card  indexes  from  which  around  1800 Jean  Paul's  literature  and  Hegel's  philosophy  had  sprung  74,  to  the  Hollerith  machine  of  the American  census  of  1890.75  In  the  numeric  field  a  parallel  development  had  led  from  Schickart's calculator  for  the  four  basic  types  of  calculation,  via  Jacquard's  programmable  looms  76,  to  the pioneer  of  computers,  Babbage,  whose  differential  engine  of  1822  reduced  the  time-consuming developments  of  series  in  trigonometry  and  ballistics  to  recurrent  difference  equations  while  his later  planned  analytical  engine  was  intended  to  make  the  whole  of  analysis  calculable  with conditional  jump  commands.77  To  achieve  the  alphanumeric  universality  of  Turing  machines, alias  computers,  however,  the  two  development  strands  had  to  be  brought  together  by  Boole's logical  algebra  and  Goedel's  theorem  of  incompleteness,  making  statements  and  axioms  as manipulable  as  figures. The  Turing  machine  of  1936  was  infinitely  slow,  its  paper  tape  infinitely  long  and  therefore inexistent.  By  contrast  the  computer,  its  technical  successor,  is  a  miracle  of  economy  of  time  and space  called  forth  by  the  exigencies  of  the  second  World  War.  At  the  same  time  that  Shannon was  demonstrating  that  simple  relays  connected  in  series  or  in  parallel  can  automate  all operations  of  Boole's  algebra  78,  Zuse  was  building  the  first  computers  for  Luftwaffe  research from  telegraph  relays  while  the  cryptography  department  of  the  Wehrmacht  rejected  his  offers  of automation.79  At  the  end  of  1943,  by  contrast,  the  British  secret  service  came  up  with  computers based  on  overmodulated  tubes  for  Turing's  war-deciding  cryptoanalysis  of  precisely  that  secret VHF  radio  traffic  which  had  made  the  German  blitzkrieg  possible.80  Finally,  in  1945,  John  von Neumann  designed  the  now  customary  architecture  of  sequential  but  microsecond-fast computers  for  the  planned  American  uranium  bomb  whose  rate  of  explosion  set  new  standards in  the  measurement  of  time.81 Von  Neumann's  design  postulated  the  following  three  system  elements: Firstly  a  central  processing  unit  for  command-controlled  processing  of alphanumeric  data  by  either  mathematical  or  logical  rules; Secondly  a  write-read  memory  for  variable  data  and  a  read-only  memory  for programmed  commands; Thirdly  a  bus  system  for  sequential  transmission  of  all  these  data  and commands  as  bi-univocally  indicated  through  binary  addresses  by  pages  and columns. With  these  three  parts,  von  Neumann  machines  articulated  the  fundamental  structure  of information  technology  as  a  functional  interrelationship  of  hardware  elements.  No  matter whether  their  environment  supplies  alphabetic  or  numerical  data,  that  is,  writing  or  media- generated  values,  the  commands,  data  and  addresses  are  all  represented  internally  by  binary numbers.  The  classic  distinction  between  functions  and  arguments,  operators  and  numerical values  has  become  permeable.  However  it  is  precisely  this  breakdown  of  the  alphabet  which

also  permits  operations  to  be  applied  to  operations,  and  ramifications  to  be  automated.  Which  is why  computers  in  principle  comprehend  all  other  media  and  can  subject  their  data  to  the mathematical  procedures  of  signal  processing.82 Data  throughput  and  access  time  depend  solely  on  physical  parameters.  Since  1948,  when the  transistor  replaced  the  tubes/printed  circuits  of  the  second  World  War,  and  1968  when integrated  circuits  replaced  the  single  transistor,  in  each  case  reducing  the  space  and  time requirement  by  a  factor  of  ten,  real  time  analyses  and  real  time  syntheses  of  one-dimensional data  flows  (of  speech  or  music  for  example)  are  no  longer  any  problem.83  So  the  sound  engineer can  go  home.  However,  for  multi-dimensional  signal  processing  in  real  time,  such  as  is  required for  television  pictures  or  computer  animations,  the  von  Neumann  architecture  becomes  a bottleneck.  For  this  reason  large  numbers  of  parallel  computers  are  already  in  use,  and biological  and  optical  circuitry  such  as  is  required  above  all  for  the  simulation  of  brain  functions, is  already  under  development.  The  day  is  not  far  off  when  signal  processing  will  reach  the physical  limits  of  feasibility.84 This  absolute  limit  is  where  the  history  of  communication  technologies  will  literally  come  to  an end.  Theoretically  there  remains  only  the  question  as  to  what  logic  this  completion  will  have obeyed.  From  Freud  85  to  McLuhan  the  classic  answer  to  this  was  a  generic  subject  -  humanity which  before  of  an  indifferent  or  interferent  natural  world  would  have  externalised  first  its  motor and  sensory  interface,  and  finally  its  intelligence,  in  technical  prosthetics.  However  if  Shannon's mathematisation  of  information  rested  on  his  "fundamental  idea"  of  inferring,  through  a conceptual  transfer,  the  "information  efficiency  of  a  jammed  transmission"  from  its cryptoanalytical  efficiency  86,  interference  will  only  be  understandable  as  the  interventions  of  a hostile  intelligence,  and  the  history  of  communication  technologies  as  a  series  of  strategic escalations.  Without  reference  to  the  individual  or  to  mankind,  communication  technologies  will have  overhauled  each  other  until  finally  an  artificial  intelligence  proceeds  to  the  interception  of possible  intelligences  in  space.87 Notes 1.  Praun  1970  137   2.  Peters  1  9B9   3.  Knies  1857,  6   4.  McLuhan  I  968   5.  Luhmann  1988,  901   6.  vgl.  Hagemeyer  1979,422-39   7.  Shannon  1949a,  10f   8.  Luhmann  1985,  21   9.  Bell  1955,  35   10.  Schiller  1904,  Xlll  17   11.  McLuhan  1968   12.  Aristoteles,  Herm.  1  6a  3-7   13.  Derrida  1974   14.  Van  Creveld  1985   15.  Voigt  1965-73,  11/2  830f   16.  Schenkel  1983,  53-59   17.  Assmann  1983,  80-88   18.  Witfagel  1962  

19.  Leroi-Gourhon  1980,  228   20.  Gaady  1977,  86f   21.  Innis  1950,  71   22.  Herodot,  Hist.  Vlll  98   23.  Lohmann  1980,  168-74   24.  Dornseiff  1922,13   25.  Vernant  1962,  1-3   26.  Havelack  1962,  32   27.  Nietzsche  1922  28,  V  218   28.  Sueton,  Augustus,  49   29.  Fronio,  zit.  Riepl  1913,  241   30.  Turing  1987,  187   31.  Augushn,  Conf.  Vl  3   32.  Innis  1950,  126-140   33.  Ong  1987,  1  19   34.  Vorstius/Joost  1977,  30-46   35.  Eisenstein  1979,  153   36.  Gumbrecht  1988,  42f   37.  Kahn  1967   38.  Beyrer  1985,  54   39.  Habermas  1971,  28-61   40.  Voigt  1965-73,  II/  848   41.  Schenda  1970   42.  Schon  1987   43.  Kittler  1987   44.  Fichte  1845,  Vlll  98   45.  Hegel  1952,  564  and  27   46.  McLuhan  1968,  283   47.  Kenner  1987   48.  Aischylos,  Agamemnon,  V  281-316   49.  Riepl  1913,  91-106   50.  Oberliesen  1982,  44-62   51.  Cajori,  1928-29,  11  182-85   52.  Schivelbusch  1977,  32-34   53.  Knies  1857,  16  19   54.  Blum  1939,  73   55.  vgl.  Derrida,  1982   56.  Kennedy,  1979,  75-97   57.  Hacking  1975   58.  Beck  1974,  37f   59.  Faulstich-Wieland/Horstkemper,  1987   60.  Leroi-Gourhan,  1980,  265-70   61.  Virillo  1986   62.  Lerg  1970   63.  Ong  1987,  136   64.  Schwipps  1971,  29   65.  Innis  1950,  169   66.  McLuhan  1968   67.  Beck  1974,  38-42   68.  Bamford  1986   69.  Benjamin  1972-B5,  1/2  495f  

70.  Shannon  1949a,  11  f   71.  von  Neumann  1967,  146f   72.  Hodges  19B3,  96   73.  Turing  1987,  17-60  and  157f   74.  Rosenkranz  1844,  15   75.  Oberliesen  182,  212-48   76.  Coy  1985,  43-48   77.  Hyman  1986,  191-279   78.  Shannan  1938,  713-23   79.  Zuse  1984,  51  f   80.  Hadges  1983,  267-88   81.  Hagen  1989   82.  Rabiner/Gold  1975   83.  Sickert  1983,  1  17  220   84.  Cambers  1985   85.  Freud  1940  68,  XIV  449f   86.  Hagemeyer  1979,  434   87.  Posner  1984,  198-202 Words  Cited Assmann,  Jan,  Schrift  Tod  und  Identitaet.  Das  Grab  als  Vorschule  der  Literatur  im  alten  Agypten. In:  Assmann,  Aleida  und  Jan/Hardmeier,  Christof  (Hrsg.)  Schrift  und  Gedaechtnis.  Beitraege  zur Archaeologie  der  literarischen  Kommunikation  1.  Muenchen  1983  64-93 Bamford,  James  NSA.  Amerikas  geheimster  Nachrichtendienst  Zurich/Wiesbaden  1986 Beck  Arnod  H.  Worte  und  Welen.  Geschichte  und  Technik  der  Nachrichtenubermiitung Frankfurt/M  1974 Bell,  D.A.  Information  theory  and  its  engineering  applications  3  Aufl.  New  York/Toronto/London 1955 Benjamin,  Walter  Das  Kunswerk  im  Zeitalter  seiner  technischen  Reproduzierbarkeit  Zweite Fassung  In:  Gesammelte  Schriften  hrsg.  v.  Tiedemann  Rolf/Schwepphaeuser  Hermann. Frankfurt/M.  1972-85  Bd  1  2  471-508 Beyrer,  Klaus,  Die  Postkutschenreise.  Tuebingen  1985.  (Untersuchungen  des  Ludwig-Uhland- lnstituts  der  Universitaet  Tuebingen  im  Auhrag  der  Tubinger  Vereinigung  fur  Volkskunde  hrsg.  v Hermann  Bausinbert  Bd  66) Blake,  George  G.,  History  of  radio  telegraphy  and  telephony.  London  1928. Blum,  Prof.  Dr.  Ing.  e.h.,  Das  neuzeitliche  Verkehrswesen  im  Dienste  der  Kriegsfuhrung.  In: Jahrbuch  fur  Wehrpolitik  und  Wehrwissenschahen  1939  73  92. Cajori,  Florian,  A  History  of  mathematica  notations.  I.  Chicago  1928  II.  Chicago  1929. Chambers,  William  G.,  Basics  of  communication  and  coding  Oxford  1985 Coy,  Wolfgong,  Industrieroboter.  Zur  Archaologie  der  zweiten  Schopfung.  Berlin  1985

Derrida,  Jacques,  Die  Postkarte  von  Sokrates  bis  an  Freud  und  jenseits.  l.  Berlin  1982. Dornseiff,  Franz,  Das  Alphabet  in  Mystik  und  Magie.  1  Auf  Leipzig  1922 Eisenstein,  Elizabeth,  The  printing  press  as  an  agent  of  change.  Communications  and  cultural transformations  in  early-modern  Europe  2  Bde.  New  York  1979. Foulstich-Wieland,  Hannelore/Horstkemper,  Marianne,  Der  Weg  zur  modernen Buerokommunikation.  Historische  Aspekte  des  Verhaltnisses  von  Frauen  und  neuen Technologien  BieleFeld  1987.(Materialien  zur  Frauenforschung  Bd.4) Fichte,  Johann  Gotlieb,  Deducierter  Plan  einer  zu  Berlin  zu  errichtenden  hoheren  Lehranstalt. (1817)  In:  Samtliche  Werke  hrsg.  v.  Immanuel  Hermann  Fichte.  Berlin  t845  Bd  Vlll  97-203 Freud,  Siegmund,  Das  Unbehagen  in  der  Kultur.  In:Gesammelte  Werke  chronologisch  geordnet. London/Frankfurt/M.  194068  Bd.XIV  419-506. Goody,  Jack,  The  domestication  of  the  savage  mind.  Cambridge  1977 Gumbrecht,  Hans  Ulrich,  Beginn  von  'Literatur'/Abschied  vom  Korper?  In:  Smolka-Koerdt Giesela/Spangenberg,  Peter  M  /Tillmann-  Barylla,  Dagmar  (Hrsg  ),  Der  Ursprung  von  Literatur Medien  Rollen  und  Kommunikationssituationen  zwischen  1450  und  1650.  Muenchen1988  15- 50. Habermas,  Juergen,  Strukturwandel  der  Oeffentlichkeit.  Untersuchungen  zu  einer  Kategorie  der burgerlichen  Gesellschaft  5.  Aufl.  Neuwied/Berlin  1971 Hacking,  lan,  The  emergence  of  probobiliy.  A  philosophica  study  of  eary  ideas  about  probability induction  and  statistical  inference  Cambridge/London/New  York/New Rochelle/Melbourne/Sidney  1975 Hagemeyer,  Friedrich-Wilhelm,  Die  Entstehung  van  Informationskonzepten  in  der Nachrichtentechnik.  Eine  Fallstudie  zur  Theoriebildung  in  der  Technik  in  Industrie-  und Kriegsforschung.  Diss.  (mosch.)  FU  Berlin  1979. Hagen,  Wolfgang,  Die  verlorene  Schrift.  Ueber  digitales  Schreiben  an  Computern.  Erscheint  in: Kittler,  Friedrich  A  /Tholen,  Georg  Christoph  (Hrsg.  Arsenale  der  Seele.  Literatur  und Medienanalyse  seit  1870  Muenchen1989. Havelock,  Eric  A.,  The  literate  revoluton  in  Greece  and  its  cultural  consequences.  Princeton 1982.  Hegel,  Georg  Wilhelm  Friedrich,  Phonomenologie  des  Geistes  (1807)  hrsg.  v.  Johannes Hofmeister  6  Aufl.  Hamburg  1952. Hodges,  Andrew,  Allan  Turing.  The  enigma.  New  York  1983. Holmberg,  Erik  J.,  ZurGeschichtedescursuspubicus  Diss.  Uppsala  1933 Hyman,  Anthony,  Charles  Babbage,  1791-1871  Philosoph  Mathematiker  Computerpionier Stuttgart  1987. Innis,  Harold  Adams,  Empire  and  Communications  Oxford  1950. Kahn,  David,  The  codebrakers.  The  story  of  secret  writing.  London  1967.

Kennedy,  Paul  M.,  Imperial  Cable  Communications  and  Strategy  1870  1914.  In:  Kennedy,  Paul M.  (Hrsg.)  The  war  plans  of  the  great  powers  1880-1914.  London  1979  75-79. Kenner,  Hugh,  The  mechanic  muse  NewYork/Oxford  1987 Kittler,  Friedrich  A.,  Grammophon  Film  Typewriter.  Berlin  1986 Kittler,  Friedrich  A.,  Aufschreibesysteme  1800/1900  2  Aufl  Muenchen1987 Knies,  Korl,  Der  Telegraph  as  Verkehrsmitel.  Tubingen  1857. Lerg,  Winfried  B.,  Die  Entstehung  des  Rundfunks  in  Deutschland.  Herkunft  und  Entwicklung eines  publizistischen  Mittels.  2  Auf  Frankfurt/M.  1970  (Beitraege  zur  Geschichte  des  deutschen Rundfunks  Bd.1) Lerai-Gourhan,  Andre,  Hand  und  Wort.  Die  Evolution  von  Technik,  Sprache  und  Kunst. Frankfurt/M  1980. Lohmann,  Johannes,  Die  Geburt  der  Tragoedie  aus  dem  Geiste  der  Musik  In:  Archiv  fur Musikwissenschaft  37  1980  167-  186. Luhmann,  Niklas,  Das  Problem  der  Epochenbildung  und  die  Evolutionstheorie.  In:  Gumbrecht, Hans  Ulrich/Link-Heer,  Ursula  (Hrsg.)  Epochenschwellen  und  Epochenstrukturen  im  Diskurs  der Literatur-  und  Sprachhistorie.  Fronkfurt/M.  1985  11-33. Luhmann,  Niklas,  Wie  ist  Bewusstsein  an  Kommunikation  beteiligt?  In:  Gumbrecht,  Hans Ulrich/Pfeiher,  K.  Ludwig  (Hrsg)  Materialitaet  der  Kommunikation.  Fronkfurt/M.1988  884-905. McLuhan,  Marshall,  Die  magischen  Kanaele,  Understandig  Media,  Duesseldorf/Wien  1968. Metropolis,  Nicholas  Constantine/Howlet,  Jack/Rota,  Gian  Carlo  (Hrsg.)  A  history  of  computing in  the  twentieth  century,  A  collection  of  essays.  New  York/London/Toronto/Sydney/San Francisco  1980. Neumann,  John  von,  AlIgemeine  und  logische  Theorie  der  Automaten.  In:  Kursbuch  8  1967  139- 175. Nietzsche,  Friedrich,  Geschichte  der  griechischen  Literatur.  (Vorlesung  Basel  1874-76)  In: Samtliche  Werke.  Muenchen1922  29  Bd  V  67  284 Oberliesen,  Rolf,  Information  Boten  und  Signale.  Geschichte  technischer Informationsverorbeitung  Reinbeck  1982 Ong,  WalterJ.,  Oralitaet  und  Literalitaet.  Die  Technologisierung  des  Wortes  Oploden  1987 Peters,  John  Durhom,  John  Locke  the  individual  and  the  origin  of  communication.  In:  Quarterly journal  of  speech,  August  1989. Posner,  Roland,  Mitteilungen  an  die  ferne  Zukunft.  Hintergrund  Anlass  Problemstellung  und Resultate  einer  Umfroge.  In:  Zeitschrift  fur  Semiotik  6  1984  195-227. Praun,  Albert,  Vernachlaessigte  Faktoren  in  der  Kriegsgeschichtsschreibung.  Das

Nachrichtenverbindungswesen  im  2.  Weltkrieg  ein  Stiefkind  der  militaerischen  Forschung. Wehrwissenschaftliche  Rundschou  H.3  1970  137-145. Rabiner,  Lawrence  R./Gold,  Bernhard,  Theory  and  application  of  digital  signal  processing Englewood  Cliffs  1975 Riep,  Wolfgang,  Das  Nachrichtenwesen  des  Altertums  Mit  besanderer  Rucksicht  ouf  die Roemer  Leipzig/Berlin  1913 Rasenkronz  Kar  Gearg  Wilhelm  Friedrich  Hegels  Leben  Berin  1844 Schenda,  Rudolf.  Volk  ohne  Buch.  Studien  zur  Sozialgeschichte  der  populaeren  Lesestoffe l770-1910.  Fronkfurt/M.  1970 Schenkel,  Wolfgang,  Wozu  die  Agypter  eine  Schrift  brauchten.  In:  Assmann,  Aleida  und Jan/Hardmeier,  Christof  (Hrsg.)  Schrift  und  Gedachinis.  Zur  Archaologie  der  literarischen Kommunikation  1.  Muenchen1983  45-63. Schiller,  Friedrich,  Was  heisst  und  zu  welchem  Ende  studiert  man  Universalgeschichte?  Eine akademische  Antritsrede  (Jena  1789)  In:  Samtliche  Werke  hrsg  v.  Eduard  von  der  Helen Stutgar/Berin  1904  Bd.  Xlll  3-24 Schivelbusch,  Wolfgang,  Geschichte  der  Eisenbahnreise.  Zur  Industrialisierung  von  Raum  und Zeit  im  19.  Jahrhundert  Muenchen1977. Schoen,  Erich,  Der  Verlust  der  Sinnlichkeit  oder  die  Verwandlung  des  Lesers.  Stuttgart  1987. Schwipps,  Werner,  Wortschlacht  im  AEther  In:  Deutsche  Welle  (Hrsg.)  Wortschlacht  im  AEther Der  deutsche  Auslandsrundfunk  im  Zweiten  Weltkrieg  Berin  1971  11-97 Shannon,  Claude  Elwood,  A  symbolic  analysis  of  relay  and  switching  circuits.  In:  Transactions of  the  American  institute  of  electrical  engineers  57  1938  713-723. Shannon,  Claude  Elwood,  Communication  in  the  presence  of  noise  In:  Proceeding  of  the institute  of  radio  engineers,  37,  1  949a,  10-21 Shannon,  Claude  Elwood,  Communicatian  theory  of  secrecy  systems.  In:  Bell  system  technical journal  1949b,  656-715 Sickert,  Klaus  (Hrsg.),  Automatische  Spracheingabe  und  Sprachausgabe.  Analyse,  Synthese und  Erkennung  menschlicher  Sprache  mit  digitalen  Systemen.  Haar  1983. Stephan,  Heinrich  von/Sater,  Karl,  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Post.  I.  Berlin  1928  II.  Berlin  III. 1935.111  Frankfurt/M  1951 Turing,  Allan  M,  Intelligence  Sevice.  Ausgewahlte  Schriften,  hrsg  v.  Datzler,  Bernhard/Kittler, Friedrich.  Berlin  1  9B7. Von  Creved,  Martin  L.,  Cammand  in  War  Cambridge  Mass.l/London  19B5 Vernani,  Jean-Pierre,  Les  origines  de  la  pensee  grecque.  Paris  1962. Virilio,  Paul,  Krieg  und  Kino  Logistik  der  Wahrnehmung.  Muenchen1  9B6

Voigt,  Fritz,  Verkehr.  I  Berlin  1973  11.  Berlin  1965. Vorstius,  Joris/Joost,  Siegfried,  Grundzuge  der  Bibliotheksgeschichte.  7  Aufl.  Wiesbaden  1977. Witfogel,  Karl,  Die  Orientalische  Despotie.  Eine  vergleichende  Untersuchung  totaler  Macht. Koln/Berlin  1962 Yates,  Frances  A.,  The  Art  of  Memory.  London  1966 Zglinicki,  Friedrich  von,  Der  Weg  des  Films.  Die  Geschichte  der  Kinematagraphie  und  ihrer Varlaufer  Berlin  1956. Zuse,  Konrad,  Der  Computer.  Mein  Lebenswerk.  2  Aufl.  Berlin/Heidelberg/New  York/Tokyo 1984. Professor  Friedrich  Kittler  is  one  of  Germany's  leading  media  theorists.  He  is  professor  of  Media History  and  Aesthetics  at  Humboldt  University-Berlin's  Institute  for  Aesthetics.
  CTheory.  All  Rights  Reserved

