Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830
DAVID MCKITTERICK
Fellow and Librarian

Trinity College, Cambridge

j
1 'J
i

PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE

The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge, CB2 2RU, UK 40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA 477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 320?, Australia Ruiz de AlarcOn 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa http://www.cambridge.org

© David McKitterick, 2003
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press. First published 2003 Reprinted 2004 Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Pr~, Cambridge

Typeface Minion 10.5114 pt.

System IMEX2e [TB]

A cataWgue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0 521 82690 X hardback

Contents

List of illustrations [page vi] Acknowledgements [ix] List ofabbreviations [xi]
1 The printed word and the modern bibliographer [ 1] 2. Dependent skills [22] 3 Pictures in motley [53] 4 A house of errors [97] 5 Perfect and imperfect [139] 6Theartofprinting [166] 7 Re-evaluation: towards the modern book [ 187] 8 Machinery and manufacture [205] 9 Instabilities: the inherent and the deliberate [217]

Notes [231] General index [303] Index of manuscripts [310]

Illustrations

1 The Book of Job, marked up in a copy of the Bishops' Bible (1602). [page 24] 2 Andrew Maunsell, The first part of the catalogue ofEnglish bookes (1595). [28] 3 Thomas Smeton, Ad virulentum Archibaldi Hamiltonii Apostate Dialogum (Edinburgh: John Ross, 1579). [39]

4-5 Missalead usum Sarum {1500). [44-5]
6 Albrecht von Eyb, Margarita poetica, copied from the edition printed by Ulrich Han (Rome, 1475). [49] 7 An engraving, by the MasterS, of,the Baptism of Christ, integrated with a manuscript collection of private prayers (1530). [54] 8 A selection from the missal, perhaps written in Carinthia, with a hand-coloured woodcut of the Crucifixion bound in. [57] 9 Part of a sheet of woodcut devotional images designed to be cut up and pasted into books. f58]

10 An engraving of ):he Nativity inserted in a Utrecht breviary (Paris, 1514). [62]
11 A coloured and reworked engraving inserted into a manuscript book of private prayers. [65]

·12-16 Livy, Historiae Romanae decades (Venice: Vindelinus de Spira, 1470), showing different printed and manuscript marginal decoration. [70-4]
BaJttQIOii;!lll<~() (!~IIi SoJtetl:i,Isolario (Venice: Guilelrnus Anima
q,:~~85.) ...

[75-7]

astronomicon (Venice, 1482). [79]
DaJite,Di~·lna

com media (Florence, 1481). [83]

23-4 Boethius, De consolatione philosophiae (Ghent, 1485 ). {85-6]

List of illustrations

vii

25 Erasmus, Moriae encomium (Basel, 1676). [89] 26 Abraham Bosse, printing copperplates {1642). [91]

27-8 john Williams, Great Britains Salomon; a sermon preached at the funerall of the King, James (1625). [94-5]
29-30 Franciscus de Platea, Opus restitutionum, usurarum, excommunicationum (Paris, 1476/7). [103-4] 31-2 Gregory I, Regula pastoralis (Cologne, not after 1471). [105-6] 33 Gregory I, Regula pastoralis (Cologne, not after 1471). {107] 34 Hieronymus Hornschuch, Orthotypographia (Leipzig, 1608). [116] 35 Michael Taylor, Tables oflogarithms (1792). [125] 36 Pietro Sarpi, Historiae Condlii Tridentini libri octo (1620). [142]

3i Pasqui/s Palinodia and his progresse (1619).
38 Biblia sacra (Salamanca, 1584). [155]

[146]

39 Alberico Gentili, De legationibus (1585). [158] 40 Nicolaus Copernicus, De revolutionibus orbium coelestium libri VI (Nuremberg, 1543). [164] 41 Frontispiece to the Universal Magazine, 1752. [174] 42 The interior of an eighteenth-century printing house.). G. Ernesti, Die Wol-eingerichtete Bilchdrnckerey (Nuremberg, 1733). [175] 43 Prosper Marchand, Histoire de l'origine et des premiers progres de l'imprimerie (The Hague, 1740). · [176] 44 Speech by David Ricardo in the House of Commons, 24 May 1819. [218]
Illustrations are reproduced by courtesy of the following: the Curators of the University Libraries, University of Oxford, 1, 8, 9, 12, 15, 17, 38; the Syndics of Cambridge University Library, 7, 10, 13, 16, 21, 23, 24, 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 43; the Syndics of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, 11; Roger Gaskell Esq., 26; the President and Fellows, Magdalen College, Oxford, 30; · the Warden and Fellows, New College, O$rd, 6; the Master and Fellows, ·Trinity College, Cambridge, 2, 3, 4, 5, 18, 19, 20, 22, 25, 29, 35, 36, 39, 40, 44.

f

I
· I

book is a considerably expanded version of the Lyell lectures in Bibliogdelivered at the University of Oxford in May 2000. I am, first, grateful Electors to the Lyell Readership for providing me with the stimulus or,~anise the issues addressed in the following pages, and to my audience contributions in discussions before and after the lectures. tackling so broad a subject, it is inevitable that one draws on experiof many years. There is no substitute for handling books, and thus >pn~ci2Ltinlg their physical properties, their differences, their materials, and appearances. The ideas for this book in a sense germinated as a reof working with the late John Oates, who introduced me to some of complexities of the earliest printed books .. But the results of the bib' lio,~raF·hical work of the late H. M. Adaros; in Cambridge (England) and Mortimer in Cambridge (Massachusetts) will be equally apparent to the student of footnotes. It is an especial personal pleasure to acknowledge here the benefits conferred by Katharine F. Pantzer on everyone who deals with early printing in the British Isles, by her inspired reVision of Pollard and Redgrave's Short-title catalogue of books down to 1640. Other ideas were reviewed and tested with the late Don McKenzie and Hugh Amory; it is this book's misfortune that it could not benefit from the discussions that were developing at the time of their untimely deaths. At various points, I have shamelessly sought help, anq never been disappointed - even though many of those who are named here cannot have realised the purposes of my importunities. In alphabetical order, I am therefore glad to thank Judy Amory, Nicolas Barker, Peter Blayney, Karen Bowen, James Carley, Chris Coppens, Ton Croisetvan Uchelen, Martin Davies, John and Clare Drury, Mary Kay Duggan, Conor Fahy, Christine Ferdinand, Roland Folter, Paul Grinke, Craig Hardey, Lotte Hellinga, Jos Hermans, . Ted Hofmann, Arnold Hunt, Dirk Imhyf, Kristian Jensen, Mayke de Jong, ·the late Vivien Law, Elisabeth Leedham-Green, Richard Linenthal, Andrew Macintosh, Ian Maclean, Linne Mooney, Paul Morgan, James Mosley, Paul and Ruth Needham, Will Noel, Adam Perkins, Nicholas Poole-Wilson, Dennis Rhodes, Nigel Roche, Richard and Mary Rouse, Margaret M. Smith, · Nicholas Stogdon, Michael Twyman, Mary Beth Wmn and, as always;
I

~~i

1 !

X

Acknowledgements

innumerable booksellers who have tolerated my searches of their shelves, tables and stockrooms. To the libraries where I have worked on this book, I offer my warmest thanks, and in particular to the many fetchers and carriers of books between the stacks and the reading rooms. Most of the groundwork was carried out in Trinity College, Cambridge and in Cambridge University Library. These apart, the Bodleian Library, the British Library, the Fitzwilliam Museum and the St Bride Printing Library have all provided more than ordinary amounts of support, and I am grateful also to the staffs of Emmanuel College, Gonvil!e and Caius College and StJohn's College at Cambridge, the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington, the Houghton, Law and Wid~ri~r libraries at Harvard, and the Firestone Library at Princeton. I am indebted to the Lyell Fund for a grant towards the cost of obtaining and reproducing the illustrations. I have been greatly encouraged in this project by the help and example of Paul Needham, who has steered me through many difficulties and has read much of the book in an earlier form. The mistakes are, of course, my own. For daily succour of all kinds, both for the contents of this book and for more ordinary practicalities, I remain, as always, most thankful of ill to my wife Rosamond.
DAVID MCKITTERICK

Abbreviations

Adams

H. M. Adams, Catalogue of books printed

on the continent ofEurope, 1501-1600, in Cambridge libraries, 2 vols. (Cambridge,
1967)
Armstrong, RenaissanCe

miniature painters

Lilian Armstrong, Renaissance miniature painters and classical imagery; the Master of the Putti and his Venetian workshop ( 1981)

BMC

Catalogue of books printed in the X.Vth century now in the British Museum .
(1908- ), reprinted 1963 E. Condello and G. de Gregorio (eds.), '

Condello and de Gregorio,

Scribi e colofoni

~

Scribi e colofoni; le sottoscrizioni di copisti dalle origini all'avento della stampa

(Spoleto, 1995)

Contemporaries ofErasmus

Peter G. Bietenholz and Thomas B. Deutscher (ed.), Contemporaries of Erasmus, 3 vols. (Toronto, 19~5'-7) T. H. Darlow and H. F. Moule, Historical

Darlow and Moule

catalogue of the printed editions ofHoly Scripture in the library of the British and Foreign Bible Society, 2 vols: (1903)
Davies, Incunabula Martin Davies (ed.), Incunabula; studies in
fifteenth~century printed books presented to

c.

U!tte Hellinga ( 1999)
De Bnjanda, Index des

livres interdits DNB Dreyfils,i\spects

J. M. de Bujanda (ed.), Index des livres interdits, 10 vols. (Sherbrooke, 1985'-96)

Dictionary of national biography
John Dreyfiis, i\spects of French

eighteenth century typography (R·oxt>u~itE
Club, 1982)

xii

List or abbreviations

Duff
Dutschke, Huntington

E. G. Duff, Fifteenth century English books; a bibliography (Bibliographical Soc., 1917) C. W. Dutschke, et al., Guide to medieval

and renaissance manuscripts in the Huntington Library, 2 vols. (San Marino,
1989)

Eisenstein, Printing press

Elizabeth Eisenstein, The printing press as an agent of change, 2 vols. (Cambridge, 1979) Desiderius Erasmus, Collected works, in English, ed. R. J. Schoeck, et al. -(Toronto, 1974-) H. W. Davies, Catalogue of a collection of early German books in the library of C Fairfax Murray, 2 vols. (1913) Philip Gaskell, A new introduction to

Erasmus, Works

Fairfax Murray, German

Gaskell, New introduction

bibliography GJ
Goff

con:or'

1972; repr. with

corrections,J974) J

Gutenbqg Jahrbuch
F. R. Goff, Incunabula in American libraries; a third census (New York, 1964), repr. from the annotated copy maintained by F. R. Goff (Millwood, NY, 1973) Anne G 0 ldgar, Impolite learning; conduct

Goldgar, Impolite learning

and community in the republic of letters, 1680-1750 (New Haven, 1995)
Greetham, Textual

scholarship

D. C. Greetham, Textual scholarship; an introduction, corrected reprint {New York, 1994)

Gesamtkatalog der Wiegendrucke (Leipzig
etc., 1925- ) Wytze Gs. Hellinga, Copy and print in the

Netherlands; an atlas of historical bibliography (Amsterdam, 1962)
T. H. Darlow and H. F..Moule, Historical

catalogue ofprinted editions of the English Bible, 1525-1961,rev. A. S. Herbert (1968)

List of abbreviations

xiii

Hindman, Printing

Sandra Hindman (ed.), Printing the

written word: the social history of books, circa 1450-1520 (Ithaca, NY, 1991)
Hindman and Farquhar, Pen to press Sandra Hindman and james Douglas Farquhar, Pen to press; illustrated

manuscripts and printed books in the first century ofprinting (College Park, Md.,
1977)
Hollstein, Dutch and

Flemish
Hollstein, German

F. W. H. Hollstein, Dutch and Flemish etchings, engravings and woodcuts, ca.1450-1700 (Amsterdam, 1949-) F. W. H. Hollstein, Hollstein's German engravings, etchings and woodcuts, 1400-1700 (Amsterdam; 1954-)
jane Quinby and Allan Stevenson,

Hunt catalogue

Catalogue of botanical books in the collection ofRachel McMasters Miller Hunt,
2 vols. in 3 (Pittsburgh, ).958--61)

''t"'

IGI

Indice generale degli incunaboli delle biblioteche d'Italia, 6 vols. (Ro~e,
1943-81)
Gerard van Thienen and John Goldfinch (eds.), Incunabula printed in the Low Countries; a census (Nieuwkoop, .1999) Adrian johns, The nature of the book; print and knowledge in the making (Chicago, 1998)

ILC

· Johns, Nature of the book

Journal of the Printing Historical Society
loal~Oa1u

and Parshall,

Re~Jais.sanceprint

David Landau and Peter Parshall, The renaissance print, 1470-1559 (New Haven, 1994) . Harold Love, Scribal publication in seventeenth-century England (Oxford, 1?93); repr. as The culture and commerce of texts (Amherst, Mass., 1998)

Scribal publication

XIV

List of abbreviations

McKitterick, Cambridge University Press, I

David McKitterick, A history of Cambridge University Press, I, Printing and the book

trade in Cambridge, 1534-1698
(Cambridge, 1992) McKitterick, Cambridge David McKitterick, A history of Cambridge

University Press, II
'!
'

''

University Press, II, Scholarship and Commerce, 1698-1872 (Cambridge, 1998)
Ruth Mortimer, Harvard College Library,

Mortimer, French

.I
Mortimer, Italian
'!

Department of Printing and Graphic Art; catalogue of books and manuscripts, I, French 16th century books, 2 vols.
(Cambridge, Mass., 1964) Ruth Mortimer, Harvard College Library,

I

I

i: 'I
I

Department ofPrinting and Graphic Art; catalogue of books and manuscripts, II, Italian 16th century books, 2 vols.
(Cainbridg~, Mass., 1974)
Moxon, Mechanick Joseph Moxon, Mechanick exercises of the whole art ofprinting, ed. Herbert Davis and Harry Carter, 2nd edn (Oxford, 1962) John Nichols, Literary anecdotes of the eighteenth century, 9 vols. (1812-16) J. C. T. Oates, A catalogue of the

exercises
Nichols, Literary

Anecdotes
Oates

fifteenth-century priflled books in the University Library, Cambridge
(Cambridge, 1954)

PBSA

Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America
I. G. Philip, The Bodleiari Library in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries .
(Oxford, 1983)

Philip, Bodleian Library

M. L. Polain, Catalogue des livres imprimes

,,I
I

au quinzieme siecle des bibliotheques ~ · Belgique, 5 vols . .(Brussels, 1979)

D. E. Rhodes (e.d.), Bookbindings and other bibliophily; essays in honour ofAnthony Hobson (Verona, 1994)

/

List of abbreviation:;

;e

Richardson, Renaissance Italy
Robinson, Dated and

Brian Richardson, Printing, writers and readers in Renaissance Italy (Cambridge,
1999) Pamela Robinson, Catalogue ofdated and . datable manuscripts, c.737-1600, in Cambridge libraries, 2 vols. (Cambridge, 1988) Bernard M. Rosenthal, The Rosenthal

;e

datable

Rosenthal, Manuscript

annotations

collection ofprinted books with manuscript annotations (Beinecke Rare Book and
Manuscript Library) (New Haven, 1997) Manfred von Arnim, Katalog der Bibliothek

Schafer Katalog
--~_f

'L '

Otto Schafer, Schweinfurt, I, Drucke, Manuskripte und Eiubiinde des XV. Jahrhunderts; 2 volsi (Stuttgart, 1984) SB
Simpson, Proof-reading

Studies in Bibliography
Percy Simpson, Proofreading in the

sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (Oxford, 1Q35)

STC

A. W. Pollard and G. R. Redgrave, A

short-title catalogue of books printed in England, Scotland, & Ireland, and of English books printed abroad, 1475-1640,
2nd edn, revised by.William A. Jackson, F. S. Ferguson and Katharine F. Pant;<er, with a chronological index by Philip R. Rider, 3 vols. (Bibliographical Soc., 1976-91)

TCBS
Voet, Golden compasses Wormald and Giles,

Transactions of Cambridge Bibliographical SocietY Leon Voet, The golden compasses,2 vols.
(Amsterdam, 1969-72) Francis Wormald and Phyllis M. Giles,

Fitzwilliam

A descriptive catalogue of the additional manuscripts in the Fitzwilliam Museum,
2 vols. (Cambridge, 1982)

All books are published in London, unless stated otherwise.
/

1

The printed word and the modern bibliographer

In 1968, the late Harry Carter opened his Lyell lectures with words that have . eome to haunt a generation born since and for whom letterpress printing is A defunct technology. 'Type is something you can pick up and hold in your 'As his next sentence went on to reveal, he had in mind bibliographers, especially those bibliographers whose ingenuity led them to forget this \.tn·darner1tal and material fact. To many bibliographers, and thus to historiliterary scholars, type is an abstraction, that leaves its mark on paper that has no other existence. It was perhaps no coincidence among the lte<)ccupati·ons of the late 1960s that D. F. MCKenzie's vigorously corrective on 'Printers of the mind; some notes on bibliographical theories and l~irltirlg-lilol"se practices' was published only a few months after Carter's ICtl"re,s, though it had been first written several year~ previously.' It is appropriate also to recall some of the otherdevelopments in printing the year 1968, a period when phototypesetting and computer appliseemed to offer the brightest future, and were certainly displacing at a speed whose pace was significantly increased by the activities ofthe COJmpug1:aphic Corporation. In that year, the VDU was first applied to cor.reclting phototypesetting, and Her Majesty's Stationery Office was putting finishing touches to computer typesetting for telephone directories. The authC.ritative books to deal with automated composition were begin- · to appear. 2 Not just for bibliographers, the word 'type' which Harry Carter understood in so tactile and corporeal a manner, was rapidly liking on a new two-dimensional meaning. These developments were pursued wiili an extraordinary concentration of effort, in a fiercely competitive environment. Yet photosetting, ilie basis of so much investment by printers at the time, and which seemed to offer the answer to so many needs, proved to be only a partial solution. Computer typesetting has brought a social as well as a technological revolution that for the first time has (for those who wish it) given authors direct control at their desks over the final printed appearance of ilieir books. During the last two decades or so, we have become accustomed to spc~ak:inj~.·. or writing of'printers' not as people, but as machines made of:pla.sti·c, rn'ej and other substances that sit on our desks: machines driven at

2

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

remove from ourselves via the computer, keyboard and screen that now form parts of our daily Jives. In similar linguistic fashion, in the eighteenth century the Royal Observatory at Greenwich employed people who were referred to as computers. At the end of the nineteenth century, the people we now know as typists were referred to as typewriters. Such changes of usage come about almost by accident, but they have their roots in a mechanical
assumption: that the printer or typewriter, human or otherwise, is an agent

of reproduction, of reproducing our thoughts, words and images- usually but not always on paper. There is perhaps something a little foolhardy in attempting to tackle so potentially large a subject as what past generations have understood by printing; but I have been moved to do so for several reasons. First, it has become even more difficult today for many people to grasp what Harry Carter, a printer trained in letterpress, understood by instinct: that for almost four centuries the vast majority of books, periodicals, newspapers, advertisements and all kinds of other printed matter were printed by means of machines and equipment, metal and wood, controlled and made to work by hand; and that metal type was'fundamental to most printing for well over five centuries.3 · Second, the technology of which he spoke has now almost entirely disappeared, in a world where even the basic words in the vocabulary, 'type', 'printer', 'print' or 'screen' have quite different meanings today from those they held until the late twentieth century. Third, and a little more subtly, the dichotomy identified by Harry Carter, bet;;;; type and its mark, compositor and bibliographer, has had a deeper effect on our understanding of the history of the printed word and image than even he may have appreciated. Modern bibliography and historical practice have tended constantly to project the values and i'ldgements of the present back to the values and practices ofthe past. Much contemporary bibliographical practice (I plead indulgence for a term that now has to stretch into the last century but one) traces ·its history from a period on the threshpeak of letterpress printing: the application of the Monotype, and other sophisticated equipment to machine composition; the .triumphs of printing machines by Robert Hoe, Robert Miehle thE:·a,p·pUcation ofphotography to printing as a daily routine
-~traltiQn. 4

/

The printed word and the modern bibliographer

expectations in authors, manufacturers and readers alike. Inevitably, as past
everyday practice comes to require conscious study, so its own rationale

slips gradually away. The purpose of historical bibliography is to recover and interpret past practice. As happens in many other fields of research, its considerable success in measuring materiality has not always kept pace with discovering not just purpose and meaning, but also the inconsequential and incidental vitality that distinguishes human activity. At a time when we also face changes in what we mean by books, and therefore find ourselves challenged for better definitions, the fullowing chapters are designed to enquire into a few of the assumptions by which we have lived for the past five hundred and more years. They question, from several points of view, what Paul Eggert has referred to as 'the illusion that imaginative activity gives rise in almost every case to a stable textual product', 5 and by considering what is meant by printing they seek to extend this argument into new territories. Soastobringsomeorderintosolargeaquestion,Ihaveselectedanumber of different but related issues. Some ofthese havebeen aired before, in greater detail and often bypeoplewith more knowledge than I can bring here. Others will be less famil~r:\11t by assembling such·a group of questions I hope to show how assumptions about the apparent authority of print, the reality of its creation, and the combination of conservatism with a creative training in readers, may be questioned, in order that we may better understand the expectations that have underlain a principal means of communication. Accordingly, I shall be exploring the relationship between manuscript and print as it emerged in the creation andmanagement.ofknowledge and ideas during roughly the first 3~0 years after the invention in the west of printing movable types; some aspects of the relationship between print and mL!mtsCiipt in the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, aperiod in which frequently find less a revolution than an accommodation; the ways in' printing, ars artium conservatrix, was not so much comptomised as IKte:nded and even partly defined by the employment of older techniques their roots in the. manuscript tradition; some - but by no means of the ways in which printing was seen not so much as an end as a ~gi:nniingin the presentation· of texts; some of the ways in which printing, ~rntin!;tY so final and therefore authoritative a statement, was liable to adjiusltm<ent between printer and reader; the ways in which readers are ~rntselvesexpected to take a part in the process of typographical creation; something of the extent to which the lapse of tinie impinges on the ~rF'OS<~s of printing, publication and reading. In each of these differentlf

r

/

4

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

1!\i:;:;:;wfi'
·I

)'

angled views, brief and impressionistic though their treatment has to be, we shall discover how the concept, as well as the act, of printing is not necessarily one of fixity, of textual rest or (still less) of stability, but actually implies a process liable and subject to change as a result both of its own mechanisms and of the assumptions and expectations of those who exploit its technological possibilities to greater or lesser extent. While we speak today, using radical and dramatic vocabulary, of a printing revolution, it was apparent from the mid-fifteenth century onwards, and perhaps especially to the .generations born after about 1470, that innovations in printing were gradual: that both in its technical achievements and in its social (including religious and political) consequences it was not invariably appropriate to speak of rapid transformation. Just as the wooden printing press itself was gradually adapted and improved, illustration techniques were applied to books with more or less success (the process was by no means one of uniform advance), typefounding was an evolving technology, whose processes and organisation were adapted to an international market of printers and readers, so, too, the effects of letterpress printing were felt djf(erently by different parts of the community. The Fifth Lateran Council, i~ t%e second decade of the sixteenth century, is riow often remembered for its attempts to control printing. But the choice of words of the decree Super impressione librorum reveals not only an acknowledgement of the power of the press for good (the spread of scholarly study) as well as for ill. It also explicitly, addresses this sense qf progressive technological as well as social change. 'Ars imprimendi libros temporibus potissimum nostris divino favente numine, inventa seu aucta et perpolita.' 'The skill of book-printing has been invented, or rather improved and perfected, with God's assistance, particularly in our time.' 6 Chronologically, most of my discussion will fall before the introduction of machine-printing in the nineteenth century. There is another volume to be written on the industrialised book, in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and with one important exception in chapter 8 I shall have relatively little to: ·say 'a,bouL this period. I wish to concentrate very largely on issues of ·~~~;bliity, as they were conceived and as they were in practice, and as the between the mid-fifteenth century and the beginning eteenth/fhis peri<>d lttas become defined mainly by reference to the (ltd. pr<ess, or common press, even though it was, in fact, one replete ~~i~<es <>f t:edori<)logic:al and material kinds in no way reflected

I

b~=:~:;i~:~i:~:'::i:~~!~~g ofintellectual <;Pljvenience? AJ; for the
c'

approx!ntat~{>ih thahl'cotnbinatio!]. of developments in the printing and
/

.

.

·this book is concerned, this is itself only

1

The printed word and the modern bibliographer

rtN~ociated industries took time to become established as ordinary practice. The iron hand press survived in commercial use until the second half of the twentieth century, in the shape of Albions, Columbians and a host of nther nineteenth-century iron presses, all worked manually and at not vastly greater speed than the old wooden or common press. The focus in this book is deliberately on western Europe, rather than Just on Britain, though - particularly in the seventeenth and eighteenth ecnturies - I shall have more to say on what will for most readers be the more familiar ground of this country. I have chosen to cast so wide a net In order to bring evidence to bear on questions that, whether they were acknowledged or not, were of common import. The obvious disadvantage · of such a dispersed approach is that it risks too much abbreviation. But ~gainst t:hat, and far outweighing it, is the advantage of reminding ourselves the commonwealth of print, whether expr~ssed in terms of authorship, ma1nufacture, distribution or readership. The international nature of the obliges us to take such an approach. Although there were sundry dif[ere:na!S in practice between various parts of Europe in this period, there also much that was held in common. Workmen took their skills from ' !Ount·-v to country (Gepnany to Italy and France in the fifteenth century; and the Rhine vall~ to England in the fifteenth and sixteenth centhe Netherlands to England in the seventeenth century; France to Netherlands in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, for example). Type--fo,unc:linLg and paper-makingwere international businesses. From the 1450s onwards, printed books were international objects of merchandise, and therefore of reading. My examples have intentionally been drawn from a range of differ- / . !l_nt kinds of literature - scientific, historical, geographical, musical and pictorial - as well as what we conventionally call literature itself. The reasons for this are twofold. Firstly, the bibliographical study of books and other printed docmnents, of texts and ofimages, has to do with the manipulation of alpha-nmneric signs or of pictures as they are applied by compositors, printers, proof-readers and others in a host of different environments. Secondly, those signs will.he used by the same compositors, pressmen and others Involved in the recreation and reproduction of texts: not just for 'literarf texts- poems, plays, novels etc.- but also for whatever other forms of writ· !ng and images require to be set or printed. Thirdly, I believe that by seeking to understand the purposes of illustration, and the artistic and technical conventions, opportunities and restrictions ofillutstr·ativerer·roductic)n,~!l; may also reconcile in a more satisfactory way our und·erstartdiJGg:·of ciifl:ert:~ forms of print.

/

6

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

In purposely embracing many forms ofliterature, and seeking a common goal, it will be seen that I part company, in some respects, with those who prefer to restrict themselves to what are generally, and often inhospitably, referred to as literary works. In his essay already referred to, for example, Paul Eggert restricted himselfto 'literary works' remarking that they 'usually consist of multiple, often competing, texts:' even though the same might be said for other forms as well. Jerome ). McGann in his discussion of 'The rationale of hypertext: limited his treatment more precisely still:
The poet's view of text is· necessarilyvery different. To the imagination the materialities of text {oral, written, printed, electronic) are inCarnational not vehicular forms. But for the scientist and scholar, the media of expression are primarily conceptual utilities, means rather than ends; to the degree that an expressive fo_nri hinders the

conceptual goal (whether it be theoretical or practical), to that extent one will seek
to evade or supersede ·it- perhaps even, in critical times, to develop J)ew intellectual devices.9

J
·i

I

I find it difficult to divorce discussion of the poet's understanding of the materialities of text from those of <;>ther authors. Indeed there are, and have been, many poets from the Greek Bucolic poets onwards, who have explolt1visual forms as a part of their meanings. 10 Among current critical preoccupitions, one might cite Emily Dickinson or Walt Whitman. Yet other authors work likewise, in their division of text into chapters or paragraphs, or in the care they take over their illustrations, or in .the way that they dispose their subject-matter between the larger type of primary parts and the smaller types offootnotes or sidenotes, or in their anxiety at their choices · of publisher or in their opinions as to the pri~s of their books. All these are in some sense 'incarnational' in that they directly affect the birth of the book for the reader,, and hence markets for anticipated sales, and (finally) the reader's response. Moreover, and despite a vocal minority, for whom the .>vi$U!tl iJnpact of poetry is as important as its alphabet-based content, there is ln Ino:st contemporary commercially published poetry to suggest that distinctive 'incarnational' influence over the finer points of llpl~pe:r, format or binding. la;vedcravmJmost<:xaJnp!esfrom aboutthree-and-a-halfcenihes\Of;h'lstc>ricalbibliography have a general bearing on !lfjtea.\iitagth!tt·conlmtantd 1m influence permeating- not !te··\Wbr<illl;of'that subject. We may perceive examples in detail; also to be observed. As will be seen in the later partsof.this·bo'Ok; there are differences in direction and in priorities

'

The printed word and the modern bibliographer

7

observed in some generations, that we may identity by historical or criteria. But the principles survive these changes; indeed, the means process of their survival help us to establish their nature. In all this, we shall be exploring the interaction between the everyday and compromises of human experience and the possibilities of ~echa11ical rep1codluction.Thereby, we shall be facing some ofthe same issues challenge us with each computer-based reworking of the relationship author, meaning and reading. these contexts, it is also necessary to consider how bibliographical unersltandir·g must be sought not exclusively in the material, social and other :or1onaic conditions of manufacture and commerce- what we may call the >adiitional skills of historical and textual bibliography- but also something it is affected by the course oftime. With some notable exceptions, this dimension, of time, is underestimated or ignored by many who have about the creation of a book in the printing house. D. F. McKenzie Peter Blayney have both demonstrated, the one from surviving docunerltrucy records and the other from a detailed typographical examination ofl,or>ksfor whose timetable of production the evidenCe is otherwise some''Wlhat th·in,ho·w cru<:iall is the relationship ofone task to another, and therefore how much we need to understandtfi&ctelative durations of chronological processes.U McKenzie's work appeared a~ long ago as 1966; yet it is still possible to find uncritical and incautious assumptions about the often messy reality of running a printing house. The printing of a book may take a few weeks, or it may take many years. The first volume of Roger Long's Astronomy, aJ1noml.ced in 1730 and printed privately in Cambridge, was publi~hed in 1742; but the second, in train for much ofthe remainder ofhis life, was not completed until 1785 - fifteen years after his death. 12 This is by no means a phenomenon unfamiliar to the twentieth century. It took twenty years to print Strickland Gibson's edition of the old statutes of the University of Oxford, published in 1931.1' I have, however, a different chronological sequence in mind. Perceptions of books chang't with. time; and with them there change also our ways of using and looking at books. I think not only of bibliophile fashions, on which there is a large if often somewhat uncritical literature. Rather, I wish to draw attention to· how the trade in,. and manufucture of, new books may be influenced by the past; how books may change their, status even before they are sold for the first time (and have not yet survived long enough to be accorded the attentions of collectors, antiquaries and

8

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

second-hand-book sellers); and the extent to which a reader may or may not notice decisions made by the printer or bookseller even when they result in an object whose appearance may diverge from the everyday of his or her
time.

I am also concerned with some of the ways in which a more comprehensive bibliographical understanding of illustration, its methods and its applications, may enhance our understanding of what we mean by stability. literature on the history of illustration is noticeable for its general failure to engage with bibliographical issues as they affect books; 14 and on the other hand the bibliographical study of books still has to engage with the related but different strategies of pictorial or figurative reproduction. In such matters we may begin to understand better how the printed bookquite apart from the manuscript- may be said to be unstable. Though it is indissolubly bound up with questions of manufacture and . production, I shall have little to say in the following on what we might term the instability of place. The ways in which we read and interpret books depend on the circumstances ofreading (in a library, at a desk, out loud, etc.) as well as where we read, or even where,we obtained what we now hold. We expect a variety of attitudes to the same book in different places, as well as by . different people. In this)cwe face the enigma of how much it can be assumed that the same book will be treated or understood in common. This maverick quality, an essential part ofthe definition ofa printed book, familiar to critical theory in literature and art alike, challenges assumptions that books possess a uniformity not just of content, but even of interpretation. 15
In assessing the changing W'\YS in which authors, printers, publishers and readers have. related one to the other in the course of the period between the mid-fifteenth and the early nineteenth centuries,. it is a help to establish ~orne broad headings for our questions. The period may be broken down ~ummary fashion as follows. (a) Fifteenth to early sixteenth centuries: at printing, and in particular at its speed of production and its !Ji'I).roduce.·mtutiple copies of apparendy the same text; a period of ~]per·im,ent rutdcmnprolni,;e. (b) Mid-sixteenth to seventeenth anxiety: at inaccuracy in the printed book, and at ~ntable increase in the numbers of publications, with forreligious or scholarly good. (c) Eighteenth ~i4@'n ilnte:res1:-in.the history of printiJ;t_g, particuc
~~J~~ll:idisj11m:t stra.nds of interest finding nn.tero ··grammars; the same complicated relationship
,1·

~

ttl

'

The printed word and the modern bibliographer

ay tit er

ets y. :o
!f

d

d
t

s )

'l

between history and method also apparent in illustration. (d) Early nineteenth century: driven by cost (not least the rates of pay for compositors) and by a new awareness in an industrialised world of the relationship between production and increased demand and consumption, a revived interest in Hpeed, in the technical possibilities of new inventions and in their social and Interpretative implications. While, obviously, there are many people, and many other strands in the tale, that do not conform to this pattern, and it neglects some major issues auch as the relationships- modern or historicised- of printing and politics (as diverse as Milton, L'Estrange and Atkyns, to take examples of just one generation in mid-seventeenth century England 16 ), the overall framework does suggest how bibliographical analysis may be made to discern a shift of still more fundamental importance in the histpry of authorship and reading. By approaching the history of the book, and the creation ofliteratnre of all kinds, in this way, and by emphasising the always transient and unstable nature ofits manufacture, we shall better understand that our present awareness of such textual characteristics in a new electronic environment is not a modern one, but one that is inherent in that supposed!)( fixative medium, of print; anq that print itself has been understood to be unstable since the mid-fifteenth century. Hinman's work on f:'G§'talrespeare First Folio, and that ofR. M. Flores on the earliest editions of Don Quixote, taught the world one aspect of what had been known to all printers from the fifteenth to the early nineteenth centuries: that printing-house practice resrt!ted in unpredictable ·and incalcrt!able variation between copies of books bound up from sheets each of whose differences in themselves cort!d be monitored and demonstrated. 17 This has. also been clearly .demonstrated in the work ofJeanlie Veyrin-Fof'rer on the first press in Paris, and of-Lotte Hellinga on the work of Peter Schaeffer at Mainz. 18 Books are printed by men as well as by machines. What ought to be a commonplace had to be forcibly demonstrated by McKenzie in his examination of the daily routines, and exceptions to routines, in the Cambridge printing house at the turn of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 19 How exactly authors' and reader~ understandings and assumptions of such instabiJities have changed over the centuries is another matter, to which_I will,turn in my final chapters. In a paper on the material origins of the.. New Bibliography, josepl:v!.b1i... Loewenstein usefully juxtaposed the founding of the Bi!Jlic·gnlphLicaJ S·O! ety not just. with legal change (the Berne Convention (1886); me··ti~·~~ Copyright Act (1911)) but also with technological change, an<i in · the phonograph and photography. 20 In fact, palaec>gr:lpfter!; atLCI:·~ phers 'alike had been e:<ploiting the latter for many years,· since ·

10

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

had photographed pages from the Codex Alexandrinus in 1856. The application of photography to zincography, and hence to the first conventionally printed photographic facsimiles of printed books and manuscripts (notably of the Domesday Book in 1861-3 and of early editions of Shakespeare) under the aegis of Sir Henry james and others in the early 1860s had an immediate and lasting effect on historical understanding among members of the general public. 21 The work of Sir Thomas Duffus Hardy, Edward Bond, Edward Maunde Thompson and Walter de Gray Birch on the Utrecht Psalter in the 1870s, and the founding of the Palaeographical Society in 1873, mark photography's coming of age for shared research in books. 22 In 1892, the very year in which the Bibliographical Society was founded, Konrad Burger began to issue his series of photographs of fifteenth-century printing types. 23 Late-nineteenth-century perceptions, as well as actions, were changed fundamentally by processes of mechanisation, and their implications for all manner of activities, social, domestic or industri;V. Not surpri~ingly, the assumptions of a mechanised world affected the course of bibliographical theory and research. Transforming though they were, McKerrow, Greg and their circle only partially recovered the ,world of the author and printer in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries: McKerrow was a publisher by · profession, and Greg's~(arrilly had expected that he would become editor of The Economist, which it ';;~ed. 24 The present book is an attempt to recover a view that is not dependent on the assumptions of a mechanised world, to distinguish between how things are made, and how people think they are ma,de; between what people see, and what they understand. No less pertinently, because of possible ·confusion between ways in 'Yhich bibliqgraphy may accommodate or respond to new technologies, Loewenstein remarks of our own time that 'new information technologies have often prompted a cult of the deconstructed text: and that as a consequence of these same technologies we prop up 'a fetishization of the composite text'. In fact, the composite text has enjoyed an existence that has exploited - openly, or clandestinely, but usually consciously - since liflfteetath century. It has been a bibliographical fact of life, accepted and )wled!led by authors, booksellers, readers and others who would use .ver··sir1ceth~ oeginning of printing with movable type in the west. In the advent of hypertext software·merelyadds to the possible Ue,,for· the firsttinae also permitting readers to explore further, ,
~il<lip11ints in mind, we may turn now to the relation~!pt:·,~n.ctp·rintasit has, become

understood in the last

·

The printed word and the modern bibliographer

II

856. The appliconventionally ;cripts (notably :espeare) under i an immediate >ers of the gen. Bond, Edward tt Psalter in the i73, mark pho1892, the very d Burger began >g types. 23 were changed >plications for trprisingly, the 1ibliographical 1row, Greg and )r and printer lr publisher by :orne editor of :npt to recover tised world, to think they are
<veen ways in .' technologies, ion tei:hnoloand that as a [zation of the I lence that has iously - since ··I accepted and ~o would use the west. In pthe possible plore further,

J)~Kpite some recent encouraging work to the contrary, there remains too

much of a division in historians' minds between manuscript and print. lt

In well to ponder the implications and the necessary qualifiers of Makolm
(llll'kes's memorable dictum, that 'the late medieval book differs moll' 11<>111

ltH cnrly medieval predecessors than it does from the printed book olt "' r ·>w ll
doy'. 25 ). B. Trapp has remarked the unhappy separation of the two media. ill

his study of illustrations to Petrarch. 26 It is one further provoked by du·ollt>·
logical assumptions. The late Neil Ker's systematic account of manusn·ipts In llritish libraries, an achievement without equal, ended at about I!iOO. !'! He allowed himself some liturgical books from a little later, notably Books of ·; ·1'10\ILrs, and one or two other manuscripts from the first twenty years of I h~ llllte<mth century also gained a place. But the overall impression remninccl: with 1500 the world of the manuscript book came to an end. The rc· decision to close the magisterial survey of manuscripts illuminnted the British Isles, edited by Jonathan Alexander, with Kathleen Sco~t's two roh1mes on the period 1390 to 1490 28 likewise avoids some of the most IO!ttple:x questions of all concerning the relationship between manuscript print, and the differing ways in whiCh each foUJld primacy or wore. one to the other either because of the circumstances of their cre·atelrtl: earliest owners, or, more freely, for their mutual exploitation. As Carlson has shown, the manuscrip£b63k was also an essential part of Henry VIII;29 the same was true of that -of Queen Elizabeth, if in rather a different and usually more modest way, at that I. In France,' the continuing tradition for luxury illuminated matnUISCI~il and some of the ways by which for a time it was helped by the printing has .been addressed by Fran~ois Avril and NiCole Reynaud, in their ofillumination'down to 1520.30 For Hebrew, Greek and music, all requiring type or other printing als that were not always readily available, or where demand was inSLUtnGI to justify them, the. manuscript tradition lasted long after the of printing. Nineteenth-century jewish communities in eastern Italy and Spain ali made and used many of their books in manUIICripli Ireland, the manuscript tradition was for many purposes stronger th'n printed until the hite -nineteenth century. 31 In educationalcmnnlU!tltl,lfj''·'·.· . ·t whether in Europe or North America, the copying out of texts and ...,.,~, of note-taking implied a continuing commitment to scribal culture alons· side that oCprintP Across Europe, news was published in manuscript Rl well as in print in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 33 Harold Love,.· Henry Woudhuysen, Peter Beal, Adam Fox, Margaret Ezell and others h11VC all demonstrated the continuing vitality of a manuscript tradition fm the

\n
I

i the relation-

pd in the last

12

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

J

circulation of texts of all kinds in seventeenth-century England and, indeed, the new ways in which it was valued and employed. 34 Whether one considers scribal texts or illumination and decoration, the boundary between manuscript and print is as untidy chronologically as it is commercially, materially or socially. In 1645, the brothers Jacques and Pierre Dupuy succeeded Nicolas Rigault as Keepers of the French Royal Library. Rigault had held that position since 1625, a period of twenty years. His long curatorship was not especially notable for accessions in printed books, old or contemporary. Despite repeated legislation, legal deposit seems to have gone largelyunheeded;35 but by !622, helped by Claude Saumaise and Jean-Baptiste Hautio, Rigault had already completed a catalogue of the library, both of manuscripts and of prioted books. Followiog the acquisition of the manuscripts of Philippe_ Hnrault in 1622, a separate catalogue was made for these too. t. ' In so far as there can be said to have been any policy with regard to accessions, the emphasis io this iofluential collection was on manuscripts. Under the regime of the Dupuys, little of this ch~nged. Pierre Dupuy died io 1651, followed by his brother in 1656, so briogiog their rdgo to an end. Despite the great iocrease in the numbers ofbooks published across Europe, and the consequent iotellectual crisis in bibliographical management, accessions of prioted books to the FrenchRqyal Library at this period remained generally poor. Nonetheless, and more importantly for the longer-term organisation "of the library, Rigault's catalogue of 1622 for the first time separat~d out printed books from manuscripts. The catalogue was divided into live sections; three of manuscripts and two of prioted books, each of the groups di~ded again'by language. The Dupuys took up Rigault's work, dividing their own catalogue of the libraryioto just three parts- two for manuscripts and one for printiog. They identified 1,329 printed works, and their work has been regarded as the ancestor of the modern catalogue of prioted books. As a total, and particularly io the context of an iocreasingly active book t.rade~the li):>rary's holdiogs were not impressive. 36 seems probable, !Jutenberg was at work towards, or perhaps even his' first prioting wheri he was recorded at Mainz io 1448, then lV.thalt thLefinaJseparation ofmanuscriptfrom printin the French too>k :ilntost two hundred years following the invention of cilc1\'e:abl.e type in the west. Other libraries were hardly more 1.-,hlltdtas nonetheless· rightly been called the printing revo~as:c:J'Ii;ml!:sls . 'tat:lioi;ueofthe Bodleian Library (1605) likewise lntern~ingl:ea>~nllli~&~ripts:wi.th printed book§.. Tj)ey were still mingled, 'in

The printed word and the modern bibliographer

/.1

'deed, conween :ially,

~ault

Iince

-noated 622, >ady 1ted tin

:es-

ier
51,

ite he of

Uy
>n

ut >s g

k

ltQ!ogtie and on the shelf, in the following edition of the catalogue By 1635, when John Rous's appendix to this catalogue appeared, mingled in the catalogue, but manuscript and print were gradBel>ar,ated on the shelves, a principle encouraged by the arrival of the !l·crints of Sir Thomas Roe (1628), of the Barocci collection (1629) those of Sir Kenelm Digby (1634). 37 At Leiden University Library, i.rn.anusc:rif>ts remained mingled with printed books in 1640, though manuscripts had always been shelved separately, and the divided ofthe rest of the collections was very largely in place by. this date. 38 time of the publication of the next Leiden catalogue, in 1674, the between printed books and manuscripts had been effected. the gradual emergence of the concept of distinction in library orbetween manuscript and print can be mapped in the catalogues of the mid-century. These catalogues, especially (but not only: were many private manuscript copies as well) in their printed form, :rec:orcledlocal holdings for their libraries' readers and bytheirdisp~sal Europe also served a more cosmopolitan purpose in the republic of 39 In the absence of systematic national or subject bibliography, save .very few areas of study, large library catalogues -,public or private valned as guides to knowledge. 40 This was reflected in the.common word 'bibliotheca' to mean libranc.,both in the sense of an actual lle<:uu·H of books and also in a more theoren\::al or (one might say) virsense, of the lineaments and government of knowledge. Hence, library atallogues had an influence as guides both to literature, and also to how .· was to be organised -whether by subject or according to mt;dium. The divon;e of the two media, manuscript and print, was not straightforward, it was accepted With a readilless encouraged perhaps more by the in.ternadonal circulation of many of these printed catalogues than by mutnal consent based on independent assessment. As a class of literature, library catalogues depend heavily on each other for organisation and ideas. This, too, was a stimulus to.a common approach. As so often, ideals , and plans were frequently contaminated in practice. The word 'editns' itself was ambiguous, and was used both of manuscripts and ofprinted books~ in Sanderus's great union catalogue BibliothecaBelgica manuscripta (1641). O~iensiblyofmanuscripts only, in fact Sanderus's work included a r~umber ofprintedbooks, quite explicitly identified in the appropriate place but thus. counteracting his title.41 The continued intermingling. of print and manuscript presented a persistent problem to cataloguers, as may be seen in the catalogue of the library of the politician and diF>lOJlia:t.: Adrian Pauw, published at the Hague in 1654. 42 After the two mediaha·((:bf

14

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

j

i'
; !

'

carefully divided into their respective sections, there was a brief 'Appendix aliquot librorum, typis excusorum, qui inter manuscripti inventi sunt.' The books included several folios which would have been hard to overlook. Not surprisingly, Amsterdam, centre of the northern European book trade, was sensitive to such issues. In 1612, the brief shelf-list of its town library mingled the two media, and offered only exiguous details of both. In 1622, the successor to this catalogue was slightly more forthcoming, but still interspersed manuscripts with printed books, both in the catalogue and on the shelves.43 The next, in 1668, revealed a reorganised library in which manuscripts, together with a handful of Chinese printed books, were recorded at the end. At Wolfenbiittel, the young Herzog August mingled manuscripts and printed books in the catalogue he began in 1611;44 but his second and much larger catalogue, begun in 1625, provided separately for manuscripts. Intellectual as well as physical differences are reflected in that of the University Library at Groningen, published iu"I669. 45 .It is a rather late example of a unified catalogue, combining print ·and' manuscript in a single sequence. Yet others were later still. The catalogue of the university library at Franeker ( 1713),'6 pitifully lacking in the. most recent books, was prefaced by an earnes(~ppeal to the potential benefactors for whom it wasnot least- intended. ThJfuw manuscripts that the university possessed were mingled with its printed books. For most of Europe, however, and though it has taken centuries to weed printed books from catalogues of manuscripts, and vice-versa, the two media were henceforth to be treated differently.47 In order to avoid any .confusion, Thoiuas Hyde made a point of the <Ji,;tinction when in 1674 he entitled his work Catalogus impressorum librorum Bibliotheca"'Bodleianae, but by then the separation had been already generally accepted. His catalogue, used in annotated and interleaved form as the basis for library catalogues in continental Europe as well as in Britain, set an international agenda.48 By the time that Edward Bernard came to edit the Catalogi librorum manuscriptorum Angliae et Hiberniae (Oxford, 1697), the divorce was largely . effected. In descriptions of afew of the older collections - notably the Laud . a~;~d Junius collections at Oxford- the existing lack of distinction between manuscript and print meant that some printed books were admitted. The accountofHenry Savile's library included many modern printed books (as well as his astronomical instruments); and the much larger library ofBishop. John Moore· featured a long. list .of fifteenth· and early sixteenth-century books, besides those bearing the adversaria of&:aliger, Isaac Casaubon and others. But, as Bernard explainedin·his introduction, such admittances were . rare exceptions.49 A developingliteratgre 9n the history of printing, aJ}d the

. -'

The printed word and the modern bibliographer ppendi, nt.'Thl' ·ok.
~book

n..·u~·lng of interest specifically in fifteenth-century printing, un111111t'knowledged revolution both in the organisation oflibraries
W!lyo of thinking. jean de Ia Caille's paeons in praise of printing, 'eel

s town fboth. tg, but ilogut· 1ry in
wert·

dnimed it to be uniquely responsible for our knowledge not IU'anclo'"' texts, but for all human knowledge. In his commitment to
cheap, by mmparison with the known prices of manuscripts until the ~~ntury, but even to the extent that the poor need no longer be 'Chncun peut avoir des Livres de toutes Sciences pour une somme ·~ 1 It was a view with its roots deep in the fifteenth century, familiar to generations of English readers in the anti-papist the subject by John Foxe:
i\re knowen, knowledge groweth, iudgment increaseth, books are Scripture is sene, the doctours be red, stories be opened, times comdecerned, falsehode detect;d, & with linger poynted, and all (as I sayd)

he ~ntil·ely forgot written or oral memory. Printing was

1gled !this for . at her na ity as

e
it

hand, attention to manuscripts as a di~tinct form of comrequi!ing;its own skills and knowledge, marked the modern of the disciplines of palaeography and codicology. Most obvi~ulminated in the work of Mabillon and Montfaucon, fruit of historical needs of the Church but equally applicabl~ to classical texts. 53 · c:if the divorce settlement is well charted, and was expressed 'in UO!lthtl s.o:heme for ordering libraries published by the Jesuits in Paris Apart from four main classes of printed books, with a supplel'rohibited books, there was also to be a sixth Cimelium, to comprise manuscripts, but also coins and medals, oriental books, antiquiteul;ptuJre and printed images. The separate qualityiof,manuscripts was not just by ·their means of.manufa¢tun!j but· also, and more in the contexts of a culture of collecting. · NO many separations, the seeds had been sown long since. Before fifteenth· century, a manuscript that was worn out could be preonly by copying. Of the major classical authors, ori!y a handfri! In witnesses older than. the ninth century. Indeed, the Carolingian ·tl is remarkable for what has been referred to as a deliberate salvage to preserve the learning ofthe past. 55 In the early fifteenth century, llmcciolini was compared with Lycurgus, and with Andronicus of in acknowledgement of his success in recovering and having copied ripts from German, Swiss and other libraries. 56 Aldus Manutius in

,

r
il

16

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

turn was regarded as the 'rescuer of Greek and Latin literature'. 57 In other
words, once printed there was no longer an overpowering need to preserve

the manuscript exemplar. Soon after being printed, and to take just two examples, early manuscripts of Pliny and Livy both disappeared from view. 58 The same philosophy of literary inheritance underlay printing that had helped determine the preservation of texts in manuscript, the difference resting in the multiplicity of copies, not in any distinctly new doctrine. The principle of collation of multiple copies was easily carried over into printed editions. When in 1466 the Strasburg printer Johann Mentelin issued a study edition of Augustine, De arte praedicandi, the editor (Stephan Hoes!, a professor of theology at Heidelberg) explained that it was based on manuscripts from Heidelberg, Spejer, Worms and Strasburg.59 Aldus and his advisers w_ere by no means the first to apply editorial principles to the study of multiple witnesses in order to arrive at a supposedly more authoritative text. Nor were they the last to discard books when a new edition had been prepared or obtained: the Bodleian Library's treatment of the Shakespeare First Folio is sufficent reminder of this widely familiar phenomenon.60 The neglect, wilful or accjdental, of many aspects of the past, visible in much of the Reformation, was not incompatible with such an attitude. Selectively dismissive historical and theological reasoning, itself a form of suppression of earlier or other un~oward texts, took dramatic and visible form in the destruction of so many books at the hands of trades in need of skins whether for glue, wrappings or as parts of bindings for new books. Passive neglect as much as active destruction accomplished in a physical way what reasoning, demagoguery and preaching did in peopl~'s minds. Bu! neither the Reformation nor the Counter-Reformation was unique in its attitude to books. The existence ofprinting, and with it the concept of republication and ofnew editions, engendered wholly new ideas ofthe status of the physical form which carried a text. Books could be replaced, and replaced . easily - if not from the copy to hand, then from another elsewhere. This ,,~,~~J!Ct~ptunderpinned the bibliographical principles of selection in Gesner's universalis (1545) and its many followers.H '"''""v"mrk.. (rather than merely exemplars) were lost as a conse~l'l!lranc<~ or more active destruction in the mid-sixteenth 1\)"\l('\O· callcullate< m·ore than approximately.62 It is arI;<!IJ,~·'i'n~ip~.ecluqtti<>natl, <Illite apart from ecclesic ~~~!tfl~'le1.19I' \!hio\\red' dt~teJrmina1tion, to preserve r~~Qil)$11r:iniscoJ?e 'eitl1er in their subject or in their ~t'##lriil·!Se.:rvers·tl><be emphasised. Manuscripts were put otli&:Uslls ·.~Mt i·s often thanks to private initiatives that so much has in fact

The printed word and the modern bibliographer

17

1er
rve

exv_ss
1ad nee me. nto tishan !on !his udy ttive )een eare sible ude. mof sible ed of )Oks. rsical iods. uein ofretusof ·laced . This sner's

···erved:by John Leland as agent for the Royal (and private) library; Parker and his circle; by Robert Cotton; by Laud and Junius; by and Colbert. 64 In France, the shelves of Jacques-Auguste de Thou as a result of the wars of religion. 65 In Italy, a reluctance on the 'llb·raJ:~esto share their inheritance seems to have been driven as much as by a positive desire for their safety. 66 In the Low Countries, University was transformed by the acquisition of the Scaliger and the manuscripts.67 The books dispersed from Amsterdam's conventual in 1578 were preserved thanks mostly to private individuals.68 Cirvaried, according to the politically, ecclesiastiQI.Ily or financially ·,powers of private collectors, and the~ingness, interest or need of owners. There were, of course, exceptions. At Utrecht, substantial the libraries of the Carthusians and the Regular carious were both straight into that of the infant university, opened to the public in For most, the effect was the same: a migration of manuscripts from for whom they had once been of daily use into the hands of those for they had a very different staynsjylsed often on private bibliophily as historical, literary or other criteria, a process often continued when books were entrusted to the new, or newly refotmed, institutions of amalgamating manuscripts of all kinds, old codices and contempopapers, the librarians (and, be it added, booksellers) of the seventeenth ntuLrycmJfirm<:d assumptions that had only ever been partially true: that displaced manuscripts, ·and that the two media were defirlable most "'"'nnr;o1celv· hv their means of production. Differences were more inlporthan sinlilarities. Such widespread and ever more deeply rooted as!UoJPtions have coloured understanding of the history of authorship, books communication generally ever since. They have defined how our Hare organised; and therefore how readers are encouraged to pursue their goals; and therefore how to think. In the interests of connoisseurship, Itself defirled according to. headings based on this distinction, the bibliophile and art market reflects genres and media, rather than historical fact. The following chapters will' address this issue from various perspectives. But before turning to them iUs worth a moment to reflect on the lessons of this divorce. They lie, inescapably, with misconceptions about the history of the book. They also Jie with current debate about the future of librarlf provision. With the advent of powerful and reasonably aflonlable <:On~ptlteJr,bllS! information teclmology, we face the same perplexities that f,,.~,-l.th·· fi~

;onse-

!eenth
:is arcclesi-

eserve
· ~their ire put iinfact

18

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

and sixteenth centuries. Decisions about what should be kept; different values set on new media compared with the old; differing costs of manufacture; the differing status of texts delivered and shared by the computer rather than by established means; differing abilities to manipulate text; questions of textual unanimity. These and many others present what ought to be perceived as dilemmas worthy of careful and informed analysis, since they incur questions not only of how and what is to be preserved from the past for future study, but also of how the means adoptelf for preservation affect our understanding of the past. In som~ ways they are but a refiguring of questions that should have been addressed more circumspecdy already, in (for example) the changing ways that succeeding generations have understood the concept offacsimile.'0 If (in D. F. McKenzie's words) forms effect meaning, 71 how are meanings to be preserved? 1'h~ngers of embracing first microfilm and more recendy electronic envir6nments as replacements and even at the expense of what we already possess have been demonstrated repeatedly in the assumptions and mistakes of library management. Both these alternative formats offer major and crucial advantages, but only if their limitations as surrogates of originals, and therefore as reinterpretations; new forms for meaning, are understood. Access to facsimiles on the World Wide Web or on locally ileld CD Roms ,is widely offered not as a supplement to library holdings, but as a reasoif not to stock books, and actively to discard in order to save increasingly expensive shelf space. For books, periodicals and other printed matter, photographic or computerised surrogates are being made to serve not merely as an alternative to originals, but as their replacements. This underlying misunderstanding of the nature of surrogates, that they are not equals, but substitutions, has permeated much library management for decades, most influentially in America. In Britain, the British Library . I Boan:J's decision to film and discard what were subsequendy discovered to include some of the best surviving examples of several hundred rare post. 1850 fo·reign newspapers became ahumiliationfor so great a national library with permanent post-imperial responsibilities to historical understanding. 72 Newspapers, printed by the thousand and even.million, are the most influential form of print ever invented. They also now include some of the rarest of all forms af print.The Library's decision that, failing interest from foreign nationa!Jibraries, they should be sold to the trade for the best price or, if that proved impossible, be sent for pulping, simply so that the Library should be disembarrassed of the cost of keeping them in North London, ignored the facts \hat microfilm is the most inadequate of surrogates for.half-tone printing or for colour, orfor understanding die economic and social genesis

..

The printed word and the modern bibliographer

19

valure; han texived uesture der~tat

· '""'""' of the newspaper press. It ignored the central historical point: lev,.oao<ers have been conceived with their own hierarchies of provalues and presented to readers in particular forms. 73 It evaded the insibil'ityof preserving in original form what was of absolute rarity. It decision based on the perceptions and pressures of public funding. to the central theme of this book, it also displayed a disheartening curatorial understanding of the link between bibliographical form public meaning. How and to what extent we comprehend the ways thought and knowledge have been shared-and interpreted for five
~"''" ''""" among authors, printers, publishers and readers, depends on ierstantdii1g their medium. heimpli·catiorts, historical and bibliographical, of this concept of surraoriginal should be at the centre of training for all who have to deal books. As Thomas Tanselle has pointed out on another occasion, no

pie) cept ,ings 'ntly

..hat
lOllS

>ffer
~ates

director would expect to behav;~ arrogant or brutally destrucmanner. 74 Nevertheless, for the last many years, numerous libraries, university and local, with otherwise long-term comritments to !.<Prmr"' the past for the ful:t!re, have actively has

~P, ~'<A.- ~ C\lrA I I' n,

·v}i<~

_

J.~t.}riifi/1~

.

.

·\\ 0

ling, cally ings, save nted ;erve
they nent >rary ed to

oost>rary ng.n nflularest reign fthat [ould lored 'tone inesis

and·\O<)nstruc~--~·~ '-\11~ report on the future of what are broadly termed artifucts in1ibraries - ~ \ \ 'x,.Jf on paper, film or electroruc bases- the Council on Library and ¥'"·nfc>rrriation Resources in Washington has sought to suggest ways in which ' better meet the needs for historians aue,gti,on:s lll Iil>rary Jmana:gerneJot might and the duty of bequeathing ~rtifacts for the unpredictable needs of future. 75 But the report becan1e increasingly confused as it sought to define what was meant by artifacts, speaking of 'artifactual status' (p. 12) and 'artifact status' (p. 23). All objects (to say nothing of electro environments) have some artifactual status, regardless of their fragility, age, rarity or financial value. In the same report, reference was made to 'information content' (pp. 20, 28), and of 'library collections ... being promoted, as it were, to resources of'artifactual, not just informational; value' (p. 9). While a great deal of information is indeed communicable, and valuable, without much opinion on the receiver's part as to how it is delivered,- it remains that for the nature of that knowledge to be understood there must be some understandffig of the platform- paper, film or electroruc -.on which it is delivered, and of the interpretative limitations as well as the possibilities of the medium. This phenomenon (it is by no means a solely modern one), where. ~-' see widespread ignorance of the nature of our printed inherita"!ce, nature of the book or pamphlet, newspaper .or broadside, as a

r

X

me

'--- ·--

r
I

20

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

meaning, is more than simply a change in medium~ from paper to screen, from words fixed to a page to words summoned as chemical reincarnations

on film or as electronic pulses in evanescent and re-formed shapes. It also implies many of the same questions that faced the first two centuries ofprinting. The world of IT, computerised editions of books, and scanned images does indeed offer its own separate and beguiling culture. In similar ways, and sometimes using analogous language, the advent of printing was hailed as God-given; the means to multiply and share work on a scale previously unimagined; a technology immensely faster than hitherto; and therefore a means of communication both superior to that which had gone before 'lf!d which was to supersede it. In fact, the new can only be understood by reference to the old, and different cultures and media must inevitably exist side by side. Confusion stalks the beginning of the twenty-first century just as it stalked the fifteenth and siJqeenth. For a while in the 1490s- five hundred years agothe Benedictinr;ri&'nk Johannes Trithemius believed that scribes should not cease their work, since only by writing could works be preserved: For handwriting placed on parchment will be able to endure a thousand years. But how long, forsooth, will printing las/, which is dependent on paper? For if in its paper volume it lasts for two hundred yearS th~t is a long time. 76 In confusing the processes with tlieir materials he revealed more than, on this occasion, a prejudice against printing. In practice, each new technology does not repla~e the previous one. Rather, it augments it, and offers alterna- ~at we may loosely call the mechanical or electronic achievemeiitls defined not only in its own terms, but also by its applications and purposein this case the conventions of letter forms and their use. Print sits beside manuscript, just as computerised IT sits beside print and manuscript. The significance of these relationships - not so much of different generations, as of related cousins, since in practice each lives alongsiqe the next - is, I!P!>an,ntly, easily missed. Keeping the same metaphor of the family of difkinds of communication: the separation eventually forced between and print was imposed by the external agents of libraries and it was not one sought by the principals. In re-examining some pli<;atliOncsofhow intimately connected the relationship really was, ways, we may also reflect on how far it is responsible to management as a culture of replacement. possible by invention are not just the obvious ones, iiviidual medium -vellum or paper, pen, type or pixel. ~~l:tertsio'n of thought, in that esta~li;hed practice must

\

.

I
,f

The pl'inted word and the modern bibliographer

21

i
~l'~t!ll,

)tiom !t Hi>o

print.
01c:lgl~ll

wayNI

haikd iously

:fore 11
re and ·refer· st side
~alked

1agoUd not
i

::Z.s. But fin its

an, on

'0fttvh··onm<,nt larger both in its conception and in its but no less importantly, new invention is inevitably to familiar principles. Printing is a new way of offer new ways of publishing and new ways of sharing Even hypertext, for all its much vaunted possibilities, defined as an extention of textual comparison of scholarship since Politian, Giorgio Merulla, Giovanni others first worked to collate texts for the printing ;ififtee:nth century. out the old in more ways than just the technological. It f 'fc>rrrler assumptions of reading, and the old structures of with the printed book and with the history of printing divorce between manuscript and print, but also, and more ni!l\!niderst;m<lin,gs concerning the reiayo~ips between the far been only partially recovered. ·· and consequence of this division form ·the ·subject of the It explores in more detail how printing combined with and habits of thougbt in the manuscript tradition, and how. 7ealistic to spealc not of one superseding the other, but of the two 1gecner. In this, we shall be looking a little further at the ext<;nt to sensible to spealc of the printing revolution, while defining our rmoewl~at more precisely.

wlogy
.terna---._,.__ nent Is posebeside 11. The 1tions, tt- is, of dif!tween es and rsome lywas; ~ble to
~

i
Is ones I I pixel.

Fmust

2

Dependent skills

I

In the last chapter, we noted the poverty of much bibliographical practice as a direct result of misinterpretation: how printing and manuscripts were divorced both in their organisation and in their study; and how as a consequence modern bibliographical (and therefore historical and literary) study has been weakened. We rlotl.'falso that by reconsidering the older relationships between the two media, we might expect to understand better the idea of printing itself. AB a coda, we further noted the importance of thinking about different media not as replacements one for another, but as having joint and interdependent existence: that one does not wholly drive out the other. AB a part of this, we touched briefly on the application of technology to understanding as well as to \lccessing past literature in libraries of our own time. In this and the following chapters, I wish to explore further some aspects of the relationships between print and manuscript in early printed books. For well over two millennia, much of western European civilisation has been surrounded by the public word, mediated in stone, metal or paint on buildings, on memorials, on notices. For a large part of this time the handwritten public notice has also been familiar in some communities. For about one,fif\h 9f this time,· printed words and images have .been an increasing part of everyday lifer~ For more than half a millennium we have assumed famili~~itywith the privately mediated word, in manuscript, print and now in·plkefs.' Y~trthese variously produced words, conveying messages of very different kinds·:and for which the medium carries its own overtones of interpretation·as··well as of importance or circumstance, are of very differing status. Moreover, their relative status may vary from generation to generation. Notices about immediate everyday life become obsolete, but are preserved for their historicalvalue. 2 Printed books fall out of and back into fashion, tall apart, or are replaced by different designs. Even stone inscriptions shift their meaning, as the impetus which caused them to be cut is diluted in succeeding generations. No one who now visi~ the small burial ground in salem, Massachusetts, and sees the inscriptions on the stapes marking the graves of those who died in the seventeenth century, will be grieving at the loss of a

Dependent skills

23

he or she had known. Notwithstanding the nearby garish reminders
that they are in 'Witch City', they may recollect, in the wording inscriptions, the then still relatively recent arrival of British settlers · families in North America. Such visitors' interest is historical at a remove, often simply as that of tourists, but yet there is also in this some sense of the founding of the most powerful nation in history. A of historical selectivity (the Mayflower was by no means the first to bring new settlers from Europe) and the accidents of topography oreservation (Salem is very convenient to tourists visiting frqm Boston, · carefully nurturing its distinct identity) have lent their own influences meanings. phenomenon, the changing status and meaning o_hlli?object over is a commonplace of art history, where we may nevertheless say that is, broadly speaking, a single physical original. That original- painting the case ofthe Elgin marbles has recently reminded us) even sculpture-'. be altered over time by hnman intervention - cleaning, restoration, - but it always retains, in whatever changed circumstance, apor condition, the memory of the identity of its first creation. 3 For books, the case is made the more complicated by what it is that ;Un:deJrst,mdby mechanical reproduction, a phrase made familiar thanks to Walter Benjamin4 but one that is pften used in ways that are, to tliblio.gra~ph.er, loose and imprecise. Later on, I shall be much concerned the fluid nature of text, of the ways in which what is, or may appear to fixed may also exist in a multiplicity of shapes: in other words, what is printing itself? The translators of the or King James, vcr:sto11 01 the Bible in 1611 had no doubt (fig. 1).' In a passage that must have seemed anachronistic to those acquainted even remotely with the history of printing, Job 19.23 was translated as follows: Oh that my words were ~ow written! Oh that they were printed in a book! · That they were graven :wjth an iron pen and lead In the rock for everi The contrast of the transient nature of bodily life with the hope of a life to come, enunciated in the next few lines, could not be greater. The next words, one of the central statements in Job, are familiar from Handel's Messiah: 'For I know that my redeemer liveth: with its ensuing allusion to physical destruction, 'iilld though after my skin worms destroy this body; yet in my flesh shall1 see God.' Whence comes this allusion to printing in a book, as a means of preservation and acknowledgement for all time? In 1535, Coverdale had more·
. .

1ctice were 'nsetudy ion'dea

ing
ing the

·gy
ur

ts
~s

n

,..

24

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

Figure I The Bookofjob, marked up in a copy of the Bishops' Bible (1602) with alterations for the Authorised Version. Inch. 19, verse 23, 'put in a booke' has been altered to <printed in a booke'. Bodleian Library Bib.Eng.l602.B.l.

prosaically written: '0 that they were put in a bok!': and this remained the common intent. The 1611 version was quite different from that widely familiar in England since the 1560s, and which, indeed, did not pass immediately out of fashion amongst many purchasers even of new Bibles after that date. The Geneva version reads as follows:
Oh that my words were now written! Oh that they were'Written eue~ in a booke! And,graued with an yron pen in lead, or in stone for euer! ·

The absence of the reference to printing is prudent,. and obviously more 3:ccur~te in that respect. But we may take this a litde further, and look at the Vulgate. This speaks of writing, and books, moving cumulatively from the' pen to the stone inscription: 'Quis mif!i tribuat ut sqibantur sermones mei? quis mibi det ut exarentur in libro .. .' But then (I follow t4e conventional verse break at this point) it becomes incoherent: 'Stylo ferreo, et plumbi

Dependent skills

vel celte sculpantur in silice?' The Douai translators, here as generally followed this closely:
grant me that my wordes may be writen? who wil geue me that they mey in a hoke, with yron penne, and in plate ofleade, or els with stile might

recently, the New English Bible translators have attempted to get closer Hebrew:
. my words might be inscribed, they might be engraved in an inscription, an iron tool and filled with lead a "mn-ess in hard rock!

pen is closer to a chisel, while the allusion to lead is to the practice stone inscriptions with molten lead so that they will stand out dearly, and the stone itself will thereby have some protection from Merner1ts. There is, incidentally, nothing of the worms or skin (both in

ov·""'-" 1611) in the next passage as translated in Jhe New English Bible,
allusion to filling in inscriptions with lead remains bothersomely supported by local archaeological evidence. The reference rnay be engraving, either in metal or in stone- ang no more. 6 complicated passage, that has caused such trouble to translators, may note one feature in particular for present purposes: the contrast both Geneva and in 1611 between permanence and transience. The original lebre"rmentior1sneither manuscript nor book. Both are introduced in later radi.tior1s b,ecaust' theyrcep.res,ent mceans ofrecording that maybe understood later audiences. But this contrast is-~ven a furth~r emphasis in 1611 by introduction of a concept entirely alien to the Old Testament as well asto Jerome: ofprinting. Again the translation has been modernised, by emplc>ylng an equivalent and more familiar concept. This is the sole appearll11ce of the word 'printed', in the sense of having to do with the making of books, in the Authorised Version.-, Its introduction at this juncture is not sinlply an allusion to book manufacture. If we turn to John Baret's Alvearie, or triple dictionarie in English, Latin and French,firstpublished at London in 1574, we find further evidence of the link perceived between the different kinds of printing. The first Latin equivalents offered for 'Printer' are the familiar Chalcogfaphus and Typographus, or; in French, Jmprimerie7 But then the older, and''ft\1L ther, meanings are explored, in Cicero, Pliny, Livy, Ovid, Quintilian; etc.: th'e', print of a dog's foot, or ofwhe're a body had lain; the printofac··ut-Whi!e

rthe Bodleian

ted the famil:liately t date.

i>ke!

!
I

~ore
~the

f the

r:~
~bi
!

26

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

I l

something printed in the mind; or printed in memory ( obsignatum). These concepts, linked in English but reflected in so disparate a vocabulary in Latin, are all secondary to the first words offered for a Printer as it is used for a manufacturer of books. Viewed in this way, the tantalising choice of words in the 1611 translation may be seen as a forcible and piquant comment on how an educated elite in the early seventeenth century viewed printing itself. Printing is, moreover, to be equated with the most permanent form of record known at that time: engraved letter~ i~ stone. A very similar point was made in the frontispiece to later editions of Sir Edwin Sandys's Europae speculum. Or, a view or survey of the state of religion in the westerne parts of the world, printed for the bookseller Michael Sparke in 1637--8. This woodcut depicts the figures of Time and Death, together holding a book above an hour-glass. The binding of the book in this image, with its metal corner- and centrepieces, and its metal clasps, to the English reader unmistalcably suggests a Bible;, for this was the way in which this book was customarily bound for long and hard use. Around the cut runs the text: Study me in thy Prime/ The Glasse doth Runne and Time doth Goe, I Bury Death and weary Time./ Death hath his EKdibave not so. The enduring nature of the Bibie, the Book, the Word of God, is reason enough forit to be studied. Not much later, Joseph Caryl, whose career as a minister was almost wholly in London and with congregations who were highly literate, was to comment more specifically on Job, in words that accommodated the seventeenth century to ancient times:
We are not to take printing in that strict sense used amongst us, for that new Art or invention opposed to writing . .._. Here printing is taken in a Jarge sense for the setting down and describing of any thing in the most.authentick and strongest manlier, for the perpetuating of it. And therefore also he would have it printed in a book, not in loose shattered papers, but in a book; for though that use also of binding bookes be not Very ancient, their writing (for the most part) being iil'Roules or Volumes; yet thOs-e Roules were under much care and inspection. 8

: 1.[:

.J!inting was endurable. On the other hand,· whatever the views of the ~~~nslati>rs.of 1611, printing in the fi.fteenth, sixteenth and seventeenthcenl~~~lf~·,{$1,!i~ither exactly repetitive, nor is it necessarily preservative of the lll\'!i!i,~~~~~r 'or text. Indeed, one need look no further than. the two ~di ti~H~itt+~1J.,IJ('6:~\l,q@.l¢AuthorisedVersion (AV) itsel! to discover variations that Were 'tlll~~n!:i¢1'fitbPd' by later generations who brought to their reading ofearliet: pr.irlt·d':bookS··exp~ctations ·schooled in dif[Aent stages of the · technology of printing and book production. 9 ·

Dependent skills

lese

'in for rds on 'Ilg rm

The Vulgate, the Geneva version and the translators of the AV Job also all 111entioned writing. This, again, is unjustified by the original Hebrew but is defensible as a paraphrase. More pertinently, it is further notable that there is no suggestion in tile AV that writing may be more or less satisfactory as a r-ecord than printing. The AV preserves tile poetic structure of tile original Hebrew, which is designed not to place one before tile oilier as a sequence (writing preceding printing), but to offer the two as parallels:
Oh that my words were now written! Oh that they were printed in a book!

5ir on
ke er

:h ·k
t:
h

1

This is important, in viewofilie false preconceptions iliat permeate so much work on tile history of tile publication and communication of texts. It is also important because so many writers of sixteentil- and early seventeenilicentury Britain demonstrated ilieir acute awareness ofa distinction between · the two media. Harold Love and Henry Woudhuysen, boili mentioned earhave concentrated on tile survival of manuscript publication, empha:ilieir case in the face of a tradition iliat has promoted printing to tile gnc1rir1g or misunderstanding of tile oilier. 10 The manuscript tradition was fumiliar for some kinds of publications, alchemical books being one ' established texts cir.example of a non-literary late survival, where inboili manuscript and print." Political and Ieg.IJ exchange likewise ept,ncled boili on manuscript and printed books and pamphlets. 12 But the trend was established, and it is appropriate to recall iliat in 1595 Maunsell, who described hinlself as bookseller on tile title-page of work (fig. 2), was at pains to emphasise iliat his survey was restricted what had been printed (in his words, 'in print')." In iliis, he found brealcing witil a bibliographical tradition tilat had encompassed manuscript and print. In tile midst of a London book trade tilat now itself as being principally one of printed books, Maunsell marks tile ICginning of tile modern presumption tilat (however inadequately) has to identify books witil print. the seventeentil ce~tury, and for many purposes much earlierilian iliat, to was not just to give a wider circnlation. For sonie- if emphatically riot everyone-it was also to establish an auiliority. 14 At Londonin 1659 a new was published of a collection of sermons by John Cotton, Minister in loston1, Nlaso;aclilm:etts. c:otl:on, formerly ofEmmanuel College, Cl\lllbridge, left England in 1633. Be died at Boston in 1652. The sermons had beep delivered some years previously, and a printed collection was much wanted · . On their publication. in 1655, two editions were qnickly dispersel.Now, '" In 1659, anoilier edition was prepared afresh from a copy larger tilan used'

... ·:

28

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

Figure 2 Andrew Maunsell, The first part of the catalogue of English.printed bookes (1595). Trinity College, Cambridge VL3.60 (I). .

hithef.to, and corrected (we are told) by Cotton himself/The revision :wa; seeMhroughthe press by Thomas Allen, Minister in Norwich. To claim of a new edition that it, was corrected by the author's own hand was no novelty. Butthe London stationer who published this book, John All~, was more

0

r
Dependent skills
llliln

usually forthcoming in explaining the circumstances that had brought

.1hout the revised edition:

)F
\ui~
~fir

i'

I have oflate received (from a neer Friend and Relation, one of the reverend Elders of that Church) another Copy of the said Treatise, far larger then the former (above 11 third part) corrected also in some places by the Authours own hand before his death: the reason of which enlargement, is not from any addition by any other hund, but {as may easily be conceived) from the diversity of the Amanuenses, who ll id take the Notes of his Sermons, some writing the same more largelY- and exactly !I len others, and several Copies so taken, being presented to the reverend Author \o correct, He, as he had Ieasure (willing and ready to gratifie the desire of his 1riends) did peruse and rectifie the sense with his pen, as he went cursorily over the 1
Hnme.rs

)fl--was

mofa IVeJty. _more

Oral performance, whether of sermons, plays, songs or university lectures, Implies also a variously recorded text on the part of the auditors. In the ease of Cotton, it is probable that there was no original man~script, or even , ecme:ction of notes: he was remembered as never having preached with such Cotton attempted some unifor~ agreeing to revise'the notes by . ' members of his congregation;jbut the point'here is not just about difference between manuscript and print, the one fluid and the other stable. It also concerns the extent to which Cotton, as author (now not same as preacher, where oratorical skills in timing, pitch of voice, gesture position in relation to the congregation all "?loured the presentation of text), was content to achieve a compromise in revisll?:g each of these disparately snntmorryaccoun~s author, he workedqtute literally with his au""""' ur amanuenses. The printed version now posthumously placed in the of readers was itself just one of several such compromises, deemednecessarily by Cotton, who could give no testimony from beyond the - to be better. and fuller than that which had been used four yeais ll'e'dously: printed from 'a Copy ... far larger then the former ... corrected ·by the Authoursown hand: The history of printing reveals less often a search for standardisation, for the formalisation of the written word and image, their setting out reproduction in coherent and due order. Thomas Hobbes expressed distinction clearly. 'The Invention of printing, though ingenious, coniwith the invention ofletters, is no great matter. But who was the first found the use of ktters, is not known.' 17 Printing has always had, to .&C<Cornrrtoclate the ad hoc, the personal preference or need that for either fCC)nC>miccor practicaJ reasons cannot be met by ordinary means. The grad- · ual assumption by printer~ of responsibility for different kinds ofwriting

r '
30 Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830 that had previously been the preserve of scribes and illuminators is the most
obvious manifestation of this.

·

In the vast expansion of printed pamphlet literature in the late eighteenth century, and particularly in the nineteenth century, the printing trade met needs by means oflower prices and greater competition, within a context that itself consisted of larger numbers of readers than could be satisfied by writing alone. There is an element here of production encouraging further production, and thus setting its own pace; but by the mid-nineteenth century the strands were clear. Type-setting and the more straightforward printing had become so low-priced, and so competitive, that printing was the cheapest means of producing even quite small numbers of copies. It was to be overcome in turn only by by the advent of the office typewriter and (later) duplicating machine and photocopier. We are a long way from the mixed world of manuscript and print in the fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but the background issues are not dissimilar. They hinge on questions of taste and precedent, and on questions of
economy.

From the beginning of printing ip western Europe, the two principal media, manuscript and print, have been widely perceived and judged as. true alternatives. There is, naturally, a tendency to emphasise the invention of printing as the precursor of the decline of manuscript: and so it was. Much, too, has been made of the few collectors who continued to pay especial (though by no means necessarily. exclusive) attention to manuscripts for their libraries, men such. as Federic~da Montefeltro (d.l482) in Urbino, Louis de Gruthuyse (d.l492) in Bruges, Ferdinand of Aragon in Naples (d.l494) or Raphael de Marcatellis (d.l508) in Ghent. 18 It is easy to exaggerate their preferences, and the first at least (notwithstanding the celebrated and misleading remark of Vespasiano da Bisticci19 ) was also the owner of printed books. For some, such as Albrecht of Brandenburg, Archbishop of Majnz (d.1545), decorated manuscripts were parts of an art collection as much as of a library. 20 But these collectors, each a veritable Maecenas, were ib.!I!C..,.waytypical of customers in the book trade, whether· before or after invention. Moreover, in each it is by no means invariably pf1~~~l:e,:~!j1.cL:d1.ltil,Sit·rtliablts ofpatronage, ope ~;!:W~~d~tdi:vid.ua:ls:lind their particular ,_~s~~nd ·~p~in.ters alike always de~ ~iC'i ibibiliogra.pnical and social ~j;hy :boll.ect·ors, abl:e a,11:d still keen ;Sji>·tih'G\ild.i>be setfortunes of the more ordlrtar.:~ tJ~ad·j~l~hil~i·iif·llta:Ly.ilwiiJi lirilrnora:bly reduced following the arrival

Dependent skills

31

in the 1460s. In Florence and Naples, for example, where local with it local skills continued, the trade in manuscript books, vellum, declined more slowly.22 at the invention of printing was a wonder at its technological In so many respects, it presented an alternative to manuscriptfor some purposes, but not necessarily either better or worse. : we may see this even in the earliest recorded report on work on Bible, the celebra!ed letter written by Enea Silvio Piccolomini to Juan de Carvajal in March 1455.
mirabili apud Francfordiam viso nihil falsi ad me scriptum est. Non integras, sed quinterniones aliquot diversorum librorum, mundissime ~cti:"in1e littere, nulla in parte mendaces, quos ·tua dignatio sine Iabore et legeret. written to me about that marvellous man seen at Frankfurt is entirely not seen complete Bibles, but only a number of quires of variom books Bible]. The script is extremely neat and legible, not at all difficult to follow. would be able to read it without effort, and indeed without glasses.23

·

wonder is partly at the exact evenness of the letters- as letters, not as For hinl, as for many other readers in ilie fifteenth, sixteentll and sevcenturies, the differences between the printed and the manuscript were less inlportant tllan tlleir similarities. sense of innovation, of a wholly new way of reprod!!cing and copybooks, was to become less particularised. 'Qua arte habet haec aetas :rolfeclto inauditum cunctis saeculis celebrandumque miraculum.' 'In this of printing, the present age truly has a miracle worth celebrating, unknown to all previous ages.'25 Just from a technical point of view, Gutenberg's own inventions ushered in a period of what has rightly been called one of intensive experinlentation.26 But such a phrase raises its own questions. First, and like any series ofexperinlents, the develppment of a new idea after the exciten'tent ofits discovery always depends partly on tile application of older, pre-existing ideas and practices as they in turn are tested and adapted anew. Secondly, many aspects of tile late fifteenth-t:entury printed book were subject to changes having notlling in themselves dependent on printing. Questions concerning page layout and rubrication, or tile ways ./ in which long texts were to be described by lists of contents, or the ways in which foliation or pagination were gradually applied to different kinds o'f books, did not of themselves arise from printing rather than manuscript, however much they may have been given new stimulus and focus by !h.eneW technology.

32

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

I

The emphasis usually placed on printing in the west, on its invention in the Rhine valley, and on the subsequent spread of new skills across Europe, has not always been conducive to comprehending the nature of the change in books that occurred in the second half of the fifteenth century. Indeed, what have come to be our assumptions have been largely dictated by those for whom the process of printing was most important. We have come to see through their eyes, rather than those of everyone who was affected by what was, for several generations, only one aspect of the reproduction of texts and images. In generalities if not in particulars, the story of the invention of printing was of early curiosity, and pride. In 1460, the colophon to the Catholicon was clear on the matter:
Alma in urbe maguntina nacionis inclite germanice. Qua~, dei clemencia tam alto ingenij lumine. donoque gratuito. ceteris terrarum nacio.nibus preferre. illustrareque dignatus est Non Calami. stili. aut penne sUffragio. S"ed·-mira patronarum formarumque concordia proporcione et niodulo. impressus atque confectus est.27

I

Peter Schoeffer, also in Mainz, repeatedly drew attention in his colophons to the primacy of his own city as the place of the invention and development .of printing ('impressorie artis inuentrice elimat_riceque prima'). 28 In 1491, Jacob Meydenbach, another printer at Mainz, likewise made much ofthe fact that printing had been invented in his city\'in qua nobilissima ciuitate et ars ac scientia hec subtilissima caract~risandi S".l.l imprimendi fuit primurn inuenta').29 The continuing eagerness of printers in Mainz to laud their own city suggests that there may have been a continuing need. to do so: that the history of the origin of printing was becoming subject to competing claims, one of which was itself put into print in 1499 when the early editions of Donatus's grammar printed in the Low Couotries were introduced into the published tale. 3 Furthermore, this historical selectivity, accurate enough in a general sense,,but not the whole truth in that by the 1490s Gutenberg's invention' ofmovable type had been married to other printing technologies, is a reminder of a phenomenon familiar-to many other historical events and movements: ofhow later generations may come to concentrate on just some aspects of major change. With this principle in mind, it is useful to consider in a little more detail the ways in which some of the earliest printed books were prese!'ted to their readers. The colophon of the Mainz Catholicon (1460) was explicit in its reminder: 'Non calami, stili, aut penne suffragio, sed mira patronarum formarumque.concordia proporcione et modulo, impressus est.' Sch0 effer, too, has left much evidence of his ways of thought. His colopho~s are

°

Dependent skills

1.vention ss Euror>·

i(lUiiiOilS

he chan; y. Indcc,l. j by tho"('
)ffieto.-;,.,.

d bywh.<l n of tc,L·.
~printing

fuller than those of almost any other early printer, and on sevthey were accompanied by further verses as well. Both in the he printed with Fust, and in those for which he was alone reafter Fust's death in 1466, Schaeffer repeatedly used a phrase that the mechanical achievement: 'Artificiosa adinuentione impricaracterizandi: absque calami exaratione sic effigiatus.' 31 Identical wording appeared in his books from 1459 and for many years

atho/i(ll/1

ncia

1<1111

choice of words, we see more than just a reminder to the reader handling a printed rather than a manuscript book. We also see pride in the invention oftextual reproduction without the need of !ore fim<larneJltaUy, Schaeffer here is expressing a view of the manuthat is highly selective. He had been trained. as a scribe, and as a scribe that he saw printing. In any case, it was a limited ho·ett<"specialised in ambitious projects, including the Clementine the Decretals of Boniface VIII, a two-volume Gratian Deereliturgical books and the works ofJustinian and of Aquinas.32 were many exceptions,33 some of them little more than exthe manufacture of the printed book for much of the fifteenth not end once printing had been completed. They still required of an apparatus whereby they could be used.· In Scl10effer's Gratian (1472), some of the rubrication was printed, and other were added in manuscript. 34 Passages in red that (thanks,apparplacing on the press) were printed wrongly positioned against type were scratched out and sometimes replaced in manuscript, in type. Pen and in order to

page. orfolio numbers, leaf signatures, or les~ decorative); rubrication or other highlighting the bod}' of the text, opening lines, chapter heads, marginal decoraor all these had to be interpolated afterthe fundamental printed released. Ouiy in and after the 1490s are such features to be found in significant numbers ofedtions. They required different skills, and considerable evidence ofSchaeffer's activities in organising the latter production of many copies of the books that he printed, indudbinding. More often, pages we~e finished under the supervision of Unlike printing, rubrication and other marks did not require all to · u ted in the same workshop or in the same locality; and there was, of them, an element ofcl10ice in that while some additions (sum

-1.

34

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

as lines to be supplied, or chapter heads) were essential to the use of a book, others (such as marginal decoration) were not. At Strasburg in about 1466, Johann Mente!in drew attention to the treat· ment of marginal index-letters. 'Et quisque cui placuerit poterit eas faciliter
manu sua per pennam etiam in marginibus nigra vel rubio co~ore signare. correspondentem ad istas intra literam positas, quod non parum vtile erit, quia citius in margine posite occurrent querenti., 35 It was up to the reader to

make the book more efficient. In other words, this process was by no means expected only to be executed by members of the book trade. For example, a copy ofJohannes Nider's Sermones de tempore et de sanctis (Speier, 1479), was bought by a priest named Martin Hehn in Upper Austria in 1483, and in 1484 he recorded at the end of the volume that he completed its rubrication himsel£ 36 All the emphasis, by printers at the time and by others since, tends to be on the achievement of printing- the innovation that transformed not only the production ofbooks, but also the ways in which they conld be employed. But in order to understand the. nature of this revolution, it is helpful to ask the opposite question: what did printing not achieve? To answer part of this large and complicated question is to view the mid-fifteenth-century book not as a printed book to which maimscript marks were added, but as a book parts of which were printed. It singles out for attention what we may term transitional books such as the two-volume Bible c:Ompleted by Schaeffer in 1462, in which some ofthe headings and large initi~s were printed, and some were not. 37 The linaitations of early printing have their own inaportance, and without appreciating them it is impossible to·understan~ how books were conceived, read and used. C. In all this, it is historically inappropriate to think, as has one recent writer, offifteenth-centuryprinting as 'a consciously inferior or imitative process'.38 Thus to ~quate two adjectives conveying quite different values betrays an insensitivity ofjudgemeht that is wholly inappropriate to the fifteenth century. This is so for several reasons, and other writers have shown more finesse in understanding the Aristotelian underpinning oflate-medievalandhumanc ist understanding of inaitation. 39 For the artist, copying was both a means of learning and a rrieans to further invention.40 The mnltiple versions ofpaintings by Dirk Bouts, Rogier van der Weyden, Robert Campin and others all witness. to sinailarly .complex values. Replication was a part of the artist's ?;i ~lliQtLsirtes:s. 41 The picto~iallinks, both in composition and in detail, fD. groups !anUsc:rii>t.Books of Hours, were not only acceptable:·to judge by .the c,!a~~dil~f ·workrna~nsltip in many of them, it was even to be encovraged. ''Bl~t~h~n1<1er:stand:ing: th.e concept .of imitation at its most practical, ~e may

Dependent skills

35

l()k,

:at
ih'l
ll"l'.

rit,

·to
IllS
lk',

9),

in
011

be
~y ~.

!k
s

.

k
(

1\Jilowing. First, with respect to the design of type, which G reel hnm in mind. Early printing types were based, not unnaturally, letter-forms, in an adaptation depending on analytical, metnnd visual skills that were widely admired, if not fnlly understood. imitative, but only to some extent, in that it involvtd tht· of new technology to old models. As Aeneas Sylvius indicnl<'s, thus necessarily inferior. Moreover, the divine language thnt wns used of the invention of printing was hardly such as to imply status. printers and those who employed them seem, not unnatumlly, the requisite skills in different ways- with practical eyes 01' of wonder. Giovanni Andrea Bussi regarded it in 1468 as sancta em, de Lignamine, a native probably of Messina, and owner in Rome during the 1470s, wrote ofthisdivina ars. Such terms circulation.'2 Second, there is in any case little to support the the fifteenth century necessarily held 'imitation' in the way that as a skill inferior to original creation. Imitation- as Cenninl in the late fourteenth century- was itselfan accomplishment Indeed, humanism itself, including interest in roman and was in large part driven by emulation of antiquity as a Biihler put it many years ago, and as still needs to·~be repeated, of the earliest printing would be well advised if he viewed the as the first printers did, as simply another form of writing',44 used for the printed and manuscript volume were interchange· volumen, exemplar, codex. Equally, the terms used to describe were carried over: litterae antiquae, litterae formatae, Iitterai Both media required a corrector, though the duties of this perin the context. of the editorial process in the printing shop, Fiche!, in Paris ln 1470, explained that the letters of Gasparus had been 'nitide & terse transcriptus' by the German printers.4' occasion he used words reminiscent of the colophon in the (1460), that had conceivably been those of Gutenberg himself:, calami. stili. aut penne suffragio. sed mi~a patronarum formarumque proporcione et modulo. impressus etconfectus est.' Printing had brought to Paris, Fichet explained, fro.Ip Mainz; 'Qua non calamo·( ut quidem illi) neque penna ( ut nos fingimus) sed aereis litteris libri fin, lur, & quidem expedite, polite & pulchre.'46 The themes of manuscript I cchnology repeatedly accompanied the traditional preoccupations, of and of appearance. A few years later, Tritheniius distinguished clearly

'I'

,,

j

~

,..

36

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

between process and appearance, printing and lettering: <ars illa mirabilis & prius inaudita imprimendi & characterizandi libros'Y The new terms, that were of necessity introduced, described the process: impressus, stampa, chalcographus. 48 They referred to the mechanics and materials of produc· tion, not to the shape of the finished article or to its appearance. And yet the historical fallacy persists, in uncritical contrasts of writing with printing. One widely read textbook remarks that 'early printers certainly tried to make their books look as much like manuscripts as possible.' 49 Greetham repeats the point later, extending the; confusion: The old, familiar late-gothic letters of contemporary fifteenth-century manuscripts and the lack of title-page and of pagination, the removal of information. about the printing of the book to the colophon at the end - all of this demonstrated that printers were trying to make their books look as much like manuscrip~ as possible (even, on occasion, using parchment rather than paper, in an iro'nic denial of the cost-saving per copy which was from the beginning one of the rllajor desiderata for printing as opposed to scribal copying).50

,],1

:·!
1''1

iii:
,,!

ri!!

This inversion of history (assuming tl]e necessity of a title-page, a later de, velopment), the assumption concerning colophons (save for the Catholicon none of the books attributable to Gutenberg bears a colophon; and its even- _ tual regularisation in printed books, where in ma':mscripts the practice had never been general, was a direct result of th~ needs of the trade specifically in printed books), the assumption that colophons had themselves been 'removed' (from where is not clear}, and the underestimating of the ways in which vellum or parchment co'/!d be used to very different purposes in manuscripts and printed books alike, all betray misunderstanding. Another study of the place of print in the renaissance observes that 'The vellum Gutenberg Bible, for example, was deliberately made to look like a manuscript.'51 Yet another alleges that 'Ifone holds a late manuscript copy of a given rert neXt to an early printed one, one is likely to doubt that any change at all has taken place.' 52 To phrase matters thus is profoundly to misjudge the complexity and yet the underlying simplicity of the relationship between manuscript and print in the mid-fifteenth century. Both were, simply, ways of making books. l:jor the vast majority of printed books very significant changes,are, in fact,,inunediatdy observable, 'in (for example, and at a quite basiclevel) the alignment of type and its more regular spatial organ:isatiou inte "Columns. The design of the page had, of course, "to be modified by the njeohanicallimitations·of type and of the printing press;\but the essevtial featuves: remaiud ,those of, books: commonly held properties, appearances and (to·ac·great,:e:ll:tent)materiaJs, Decoration and other guidan~e for"·the

Dependent skills

,17

nirabili:; ,\ terms, th;1l !s, stamp11, )f produc of writing ·s certain Iy
~ossible."~''

1anuscripts about the trated that as possibk nial of the iderata for
1

not added in order to make a printed book look like a manuscript; because that was expected of some kinds of books, for some markets or individuals. For mauy kinds of books, it was essential to the reader. The distinction may appear to be a subtle one; but !an~er1tal to framing any coherent understanding of how printing dominant position. Is sometimes confusion between the purposes of decoration and of reproducing words, figures, or explanatory or natrative As with writing, the purpose of printing is to convey n:ieaning, sequence of words, figures, punctuation etc. and in the context - the design of a book, its size, its materials, its type and visual This is a fundamentally conservative process, since meaning be built upon accepted verities. · then, may we understand the relationship of one medium to the

later de-

atholicon
·its even~ticehad

I"'lnnurno introdUced and early custoniers expected their books to resemble inlJmatouscri]pts, the usual trick was to rule in guide lines around every line text because writiug presumably looked naked without it. 53 .

ecifically been 'reways in poses in 1at 'The >k like a :copy of 'change tisjudge 1etween ly, ways lificant :a quite !.isation :by the ;sential !ranees for the

here lies not only in the fact that relatively few early printed ·orumtnthe lines so described -lines that had usually been designed as scribes, and were hence widely familiar in manuscripts. In printed SllCI1llll1es were added for decorative effect, not for use. Tlieyare most 1 on.,Jvfmmrl in some early printed Bibles and in liturgical printing. The survived in emaciated form, for reasons having<;,othing to do with and everything to do with visual enrichment,. in, for example, ul<:d rnargi:nal structures in Bibles of the seventeenth century. The 'II !tV hP< alSO in the phrasing abOUt the expectations Of early. CUStOmerS. peo]Jie, apart from a few.with somewhat extravagant tastes, we know little directly; most can only be extrapolated by ~plication. Some marvelled at the new invention~ Most, we may be sure, viewed printed book and the manuscript book in much the same way; they no expectations, but they ·had plenty of assumptions, most of them

For many books, the,pen was as essential to e_arlyprinters as was printers'

lnlc 5'

Many early printed books, and particularly those having more than -

!he simplest of literary structures, required manuscript complement before
lh~y could be used. I shall return to this further below.55 The 42"1ine Bible w11s printed with spaces between books and chapters, for the conventional
~uidance

to the reader to be written in. To employ manuscript

38

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-!830

points, and in particular to introduce red or other colours, in this and many books published subsequently, was more economical than to employ type and the press. To use printed colour for a heirarchy of reference was technically difficult, and expensive; change only became generally feasible once printers owned or had access to type in a sufficient range of sizes or styles. Though experiments with large initial letters were made from the first, as another of the several means by which the reader was gnided, such letters were also added to printed pages by hand well into the sixteenth century. Printed folio or page numbers, like printed signaturem'!<ks and catchwords, were late developments, in the last quarter of the fifteenth century, 56 not because they were unwanted (the ample evidence of manuscripts makes it clear that they were in common nse long before they were printed), but for technical reasons. They fell outside the main type area of tlie printed page, and beyond the available space under the platen of the press: to print quire signatures, sufficiently clear of the text, was often impossible ~ause the platen of the press was too small, and in some early printed books they were stamped in separately. 57 For binders, catchwords and signature marks were written or stamped in. Tbe ae<;eptance that such guides migbt be printed with the main type area was a major aesthetic concession to the demands of the press, and acknowledgement of a manufacm:ing convenience. In similar fashion, printed page headings replaced those in manuscript, and became more widely used, only by slow degrees. In all of these different features of page layout, the process of change fro~ manuscript to print was a gradual one, though in each case we are dealing also with printed, rather than manuscript, books. Demands for maps, diagrams of all kinds, technically ambitious features such as volvelles, sorts not available within the typographical resources of a particular printer: all were readily and easily answered in manuscript. 58 ../ In 1469, Ulrich Han, possessing no Greek type when he printed Cicero's Tusculanae quaestiones, "left spaces into which it could be written.59 In 1579, the Edinburgh printer John Ross similarly left spaces into which Greek or Hebrew was written (fig. 3).60 Lingnistic needs had to be inet as well. In 1494, missals printed in Venice for the English. (Sarrun rite) market were left with a blank space at thepoint in the marriage service where the couple vows in theif native langnage.61 I shall return to maps and . . . tpj;~Ji!Sl.Jes,in the-next chapter, but it- is important tO'"remember ~·~ilfo'!lllalll!SCtript insertions ranged fro!lJ. single letters or

Dependent skills

many

r type
tech~once

ltyles. rst, as
.etters

1tury.
rords,

ot bekes it ), but ·inted print
cause

;they narks inted ids of milar
came

ces of 5radthan
tures

:es of ipt."
·ero's

!579,

ek or U. In
were

!Uple ,and P.ber
ts or

Thomas Smeton, Ad virulentum Archibaldi Hamiltonii ApoState Dialogum John Ross, 1579), p. 18. AB the_prjnter possessed type for neither language,~ In Greek and Hebrew have been added in manuscript. Trinity College, C.7.117.

forthe

40

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

same person, the printed area permitted spaces in which the text wa.s II 1 I completed, and the reader to be guided. Notwithstanding the exampb Eberhard Konig's work on the early Mainz Bibles, Lotte Hellinga on p,.,, Schoeffer, Elly Cockx-Indestege's study of a book printed by the Brei I ·' of the Common Life at Brussels in 1476, and Lilian Armstrong on ]enso Breviary of 1478, there remain very few studies of books as ~ditions, wlu·1 the distinctions between rubrication and decoration in each r to understanding what was meant in the fifteenth century by publishi n~. Considerable research is still required before we shall understand to whlll l'k tent the local conventions of rubrication or decoration might in some have been influenced by local habits of reading, and how far the dis:tincti·llllj were deemed to be practical ones rather than aesthetic. How far, iri other words, did the expectations of manuscripts into printed books not just in matters of taste and decoration, but also use? How far, indeed, may these two be considered e issues? 63 relevant ere to recall par e typographical questions, and Paul Needl~arn' observation, based on the work of Georg Heinrich Pertz and G .I. LI<,ttrn~l that the type of Gutenberg's 30'lii].e Indulgence bears a close reserrobhong to what Lieftinck called littera hybrida;a script associated in particular Cologne and its region, and that the Indulgence was ~irculated prirnaril~ that very diocese. 64 On the other hand, the necessarily wide areas over books had to be sold meant that typograpljical presentation, in pmrticulil' the design of .typefaces; would by no means coincide with ge<Jgrapllicd distribution of habits in reading and writing as it was expressed in letter-forms. Music printing offers a microcosm of the ways in whicll technical available equipment and customer need were accommodated one with I other. It ~as not developed to the point where both staves and notes printed together until the 1470s. It remained an area for experirnent,65 foi making do with lack of appropriate materials, for many years after and it is noticeable that even printers who possessed the requisite eqtlip·nwlli do not appear to have used it consiStently. The earliest book ip. which both staves and notes were printed tm>ellw·! appears to have been the s.o-called Constance Gradual, of not after 1~ in which the notes and the staves were printed by double impression.''" little later, in Rome in 1476, Ulrich Han introduced-the same method/'1 , Before this, music was added by hand, as in the Fust and Schoeffer Psall<'f' of 1457,'8· orindeed as in·the edition of the Missale romanum printed hy Han himself ouly in 1475. But the history of music printing is not o1w 'ol' uniform progression, and many older practices remained in use for anol ],,.,.

Dependent skills

41

The reasons were part technical, part economic, and part

· that they were related to potential markets.At some points, in the 1457 Psalter for both staves and notes to be added local custom: in the copy now at Windsor, a five-linestave has in the Rylands copy there are four lines. 69 Staves or notes by hand once the other had been printed. Thus, on another example) notes only were printed, so that staves might be edition of Franciscus Niger's Grammatica (Venice: Theodor Wtirzlmr~, 1480).'0 More commonly, and until well after the were written in, over printed staves. Dr Duggan identified some fifteen of them missals, from Italian presses between 1482 which only the staves were printed. 71 The unique Cambridge Lic>ra1·v copy of the Manuale ad usum Baiocensem (i.e. Bayeux) Le Bourgeois at Rauen in 1494 has staves drawn in with . and tlie notes .added in manuscript. At Valencia in 1495, the ~.GIJilleln1us dePodio's Ars musicorum printed some staves, leaving in the trade or as readers, to add the notes by hand; they also 1or·ti011S of pages completely blank forth~ necessary manuscript Few copies seem to have been completed as intended. Like Le plenty ofother printers did not find it worthwhile to make the investment in music type when some other means would serve. true in the sixteenth century,·but it w~s not always clre reason .c not t:o b·e p·rinted in full. In the case of the Salzburg Agenda printed Wolff (Jacobus de Pforzheinl) at Basel in 1511, some passages were with notes, and in others the red-printed staves were left blank.74 '""'"d" missal printed by Bevilacqua at Lyon in 1517 was by no last book in which the staves were printed, leaving the purchaser to add notation in manuscript.'' tWithstancUmg questions of technical difficulty,. or of investment in type that niight only be used occasionally, there were frequently advantages to employing only a single impression, for one half process of reproducing musk .In liturgical books, the blank staves the insertion oflocal uses 'at the appropriate places, and so afforded wider circle for possible sales. Suitable hynins or other music could ·added locally in.manuscript, using either roman or gothic notation.'6 this way the ability of the printing press to produce many copies was ;com nno<latc,d1:o the otherwise comparatively small potential sales of some hcse complex liturgical books. In a Missale romanum printed in central lliliy in about 1472 no less than about one-third of the text area·was It/,, 11 k, for the insertion of rubrics, music and initials. 77 A liturgical

'.

42

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

printed by Conrad Winters at Cologne in about 1482 was left with very substantial white space for extra text, and the few surviving copies testify to a range of purchasers and users in England and Germanyn The Basel printer Michael Wenssler was equipped to print music, but his books also display pages printed with or without staves or notes, the variation in practice seemingly having no bearing on tbe chronology ofhis.press. 79 Such books are reminders of ways in which, in a highly specialist market, the printer adjusts two traditions: manuscript and print. Their complementary nature, and the flexibility that each allows the other, in manufacture or in circulation, further emphasises the nature of their joint existence and interdependence. The bibliography of music is technically complicated by the, gradual development ofmeans to print staves and notes by letterpress, and with this the separate development of mensural notation. 80 But it is linked with readers in a manner quite unlike other literary forms. Music is intended to be read in performance; and since performance depends on interpretation, in the most obvious of ways, so the modern reader (or in this case, also the performer) will still today expect to annotate the score. For ensemble playing or singing, such annotation is essential if there is to be agreement between the performers as to details of phrasing, tempi, etc,)n other wor4s, we see here not simply the ordinary intercourse between author, manufacturer and reader, but the firm knowledge and unavoidable expectation on the part of the author (composer) that the reader t.Performer) will bring his or her own circumstantial needs, besides inclination, experience and interpretation. Whatever instructions the composer or editor may give as to tempi, volume, or e_ven.instruments, the performer becomes, for the audience, a part of the creation (or, if you will, 'authoring') of a piece ofmusic. The principle becomes still further complicated in orchestral performance, in the interplay between conductor and instrumentalists. Listeners and the circmnstances of performance introduce other series of variants; but I am concerned here to remind ourselves of the necessity, in performance, of adding manuscript to print, and so inevitably recording variations within !Qe terrain- musical or otherwise textual- permitted by the printed marks. The score annotated by a performer or ~onductor is quite unlike the marginal notes made by an . / individual in more 'ordinary' books, in that it comes at a point before the author's{composer's) work is delivered to the reader.(audience). ··: :. ·Printe.d· matter is .to be found inserted oin manuscripts of many subjects; On·the other· hand, some printed· matter was prepared specifically for· manuscripts, ;either.already<existing or even (it may reasonably be supposed),yet'to ·b.e·written;· '!:he· Canon missae printed.byFust anol Schoeffer at Main~ in 1457/8 was advertised ·as a separate-publication, which coufd- by
'

Dependent skills

ver)

inserted into manuscripts.8 I It was printed often on vellum,

est if) Basd
alstl
ctic~·

ooks
inter :ure,

ion, nee. del the lers ead ;the
~er

ing
~en

see
nd 'of i ter . ta-

11trt

>le

'Y.
.. es

re >t "

ll'
d
n

e

r

-lleavilv used part of the missal, and it is not unreasonable to it was printed in anticipation of, as- wdl as in response to, . Schaeffer subsequently established himself as a major and copies of his Canon were inserted into their'liturgiA manuscript Salzburg missal, later in Vienna, still retains its The fact that at least one of Schaeffer's copies seems stiii to IVailable as late as the 1490s, for insertion into a printed edition, ~cessaril)' mean thatthe idea was not welcomed.83 The temptation Schaeffer's enterprise in printing jnst that part of the book most used is to perceive, once again, the triumph of print. But from the reality. It may rather be that the longevity of his stock, reflects a market that never materialised as substantially as It is certainly the case that many printed missals of the 1ncl ea1rly· sbrte.mthcenturies are either made up of several different fn1gn1en,ts were fastened together, or were kept in use by the n'ofthe canon with manuscriptleaves. Vellnm printed leaves were but both in copies ofthe missal that have been in church use, 'that have been mostly in wealthy private h'ouseholds, manuscript were an ordinary part of the book (figs. 4 and 5). 84 .. of the preoccupations of the modern secondary literal}ire on the offifteenth-century manuscripts and.printing, and the naturhl desire IibJitio~n organisers to show what will be visually attractive to most have unwittingly led to widespread and false assumptions. Despite recent scholarly emphasis on decoration and ·on illumination, it that most books of this period, whether written ?r printed, were and devoid of ornament. The remarks here and in the next chapter on relationship between manuscript and p~int, illumination by hand and ICOiration with printed letterpress blocks or intaglio plates, concentrate tev.ital>lv on some specialised categories of books. It should, however, be constantly in mind that the majority of surviving books printed in second half of the fifteenth century, just as .in later centuries .to an ever lncrea.sing degree, had little or no manuscript decoration or other teXtual addition of any kind, not even.rubrication. Where .spaces were left for initial letters, the letters added in manuscript were most often of the, simplest kind. Jn many copies such spaces have remained blank. Historians and others have tended to forget this inlpression ~£plainness, not just because ofbibliophilic preferences for what is decorated rather than what is plain, but also because of t!Ie ways that books have been used and valued over the centuries. books, undecorated save perhaps for a sinlple woodcut or two, tend

44

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-!830

Figure 4 Missale ad usum Sarum on vellum (London, printed by Pynson at the cost of 1 John Morton, Cardinal and Archbishop of Canterbury, 1500 ). Trinity College, Cambridge Vl.l8.21. The beginning of the manuscript Canon of the Mass. Note Jhat mentions of the Pope have been erased, and replaced by an allusion to Henry VIII, wh() came to the throne in 1509.

~,m,,.,,,~, ·~1

1830

Dependent skills

·I!\
I

Missale ad usum Saritm on vellum (London, printed by Pynson at the cost ofJohn Morton,

and Archbishop of Canterbury, 1500). Trinity College, Cambridge VI.18.21. Opening showing
of the manuscript section and the ensuing printed page.

· and cheaper books (such as schoolbooks or university textbooks, of,dev'OtionuS<'d am<mg;stthepo<Jr,manuals for daily living, almanacs, medical compendia) were not only printed in large quantities: also survived in dispropo~tionately small numbers. Like most short, pamphlet-length works that also came from fifteenth-century there was no cause to decorate them before they were sold. Like most b~

to generalise about distinctions between manuscripts .and printed and thereby to miss how much they have in common. Erasmus was trl!!htab<mtthetextofJeromeasithadsufferedatthehandsofsuccessive

/

Nurvives was not so much corrupted as virtually destroyed and defaced, and

lllll"tly by the fault of illiterate scribes whose habit it is to copy an accurate iiHtccurately and make a faulty text worse, to leave out what they cannot read

46

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

and to corrupt what they do not understand . .. What is more '(and this is the

pestilential way of ruining a text), as though it were not enough to have put so many idiotic blunders, showing equally ignorance and inability to write) the name of one who is equally a great scholar and a great stylist, they have in their own rubbish into his expositions in such a way that no one can them. 85 . -.

and of successive editors: The actual task of detecting, of smelling out as it were, anything that does nolt somtl like a true and genuine reading requires a man in my opinion who is well in>orrned quick-witted, and alert. But on top of this far the most difficult thing is either conjecture from corruptions of different kinds what the author wtpte, or guess original reading on the basis of such fragments and vestiges of the _shapes of script as may Survive ... One man copies not what he reads but whafhe thinks understands; another supposes everything .he does not undertand to be and changes the text as he thinks bes~ following no guide but his own unallin:atic>n a third detects perhaps that the text is corrupt, but while trying fo emend it an unambitious conjectUre he introduces two mistakes in place of one, and trying to cure a slight wound inflicts, one that is incurable.86 u Besides these comments on (he treatment accorded by scribes to the of a ·father of the. Church, we may set those a few years later b]i" William Thynne on that accorded by printers to the work of Chaucer:

I haue of a longe season moche vsed to'rede & vysite the same: & as bo~es of dyuers impryntes came vnto my. handes, I easely ~nd without great studye, myghtand haue deprehended in them many errours, falsyties, and· depreuations, whych ·euidently appered by the contrarietees and alteracions founde by collacion of the one wyth the other, whero/ I was moued and styJed to make diligent serch, where I myght fy'nde or recouer any trewe copies_ or exemplaries _of the sayd hokes, whervnto in processeof tyme, not wythout coste & payne I attayned, and not onely vnto suche as seme to be very trewe copyes of those workes of Geffray C~aucer, whyche befor had bene put in print, but also to dyners other neuer tyll nowe imprinted. 87
Prior to Thynne, Chaucer had been printed by Caxton, Richard Pynson and Wvnbm de Worde. Printing had actually helped to debase the manuscript foundation. All the faults that Erasmus complains ofin scribes arid of manuscripts can be paralleled in the wodd of the printed)Jook. look no further than Caxton's Marte d'Arthur, or the compositors ,Folio of Shakespeare, or successive editorial attempts to put glaring errors in the latter, to appreciate that in these matters the compositor shared many of the same characteristics.
l*~milar nee.ds in fitting copy to .its new place, and The same

830

Dependent skills

47

more (and this is the mm1 tough to have put togetht'l l inability to write, undt·l t stylist, they have mixct! hat no one can separah

1.g that does not sound who is well informed,

::ult thing is either h 1 ·r wrote, or guess tlw

of the shapes of tlw t what he thinks lw
'and to be corrupt, \own imagination; ; to emend it with of one,· and while

'es to the works 'f'r by William

okes

dyuers yghtand haue ych euidently :he one wyth tere I myght
vhervnto in vnto suche

of

!JChe befor i"

~uscript

bes and i book. ositors to put

mlulcuding to speak of any transition from manuscript to print as if ~ ~nile process, let alone an orderly one, or indeed that the process Ill one direction. Moreover, and to repeat what has already been the printing revolution itself, a phrase taken to heart by some wus no revolution in the sense that it wrought instant change. and soprolonged, and like many revolutions its progress was irregular, '· were variable, even erratic. As mentioned already, the design in print was born of a gradual continuum of adaptation HU!Icriot forms with whose complexities we are only beginning to The differences were in the radically different ways offabrication, reconsideration of established visual and creative habits. Both for for punchcutters, the design and manufacture of printing types assimilation and adaptation of shapesmade by the pen to shapes !Jte:euoJeana cast metal. Readers, meanwhile, were to add their own structure with their pens, if they thought lit. words, and to summarise: printing; and the user of the printed .. depended on and influenced manuscripts long after \he inven!rlrttir·g with movable type. We may go further, and state the case rcefully. Manuscripts often depended on printing. Aspects of the weaknesses of the early printing anp publishing trade are ·lv 1,;"'",1 by the existence of manuscripts written well after the pubwidely printed texts. This phenomenon has been highlighted in thanks to the existence of the catalogues of dated and datable 90 These. same catalogues have drawn further attention to the llun·uS<:rip·ts that were copied from printed books - usually (though ll!riably) because no further printed ropy was available to the enscopyist. The scale of this phenomenon has still to be assessed, and certainly underestinoated at present. The reasons forthe copying books were no doubt many. 91 Unavailability of texts in partic)Culliti<~s, preferences of taste, chance and, individual circumstance all their part. The personal miscellany, whether domestic, literary, poor devotional, that is so prominent a feature oflate lifteenth'century "'"'"'"-'· could scarcely be reproduced in print so as to suit individWhether student compilations of crucial extracts for university or entire works, the transition froni manuscript to print is confused '·""'''""'"!needs as distinct from the more generalmarket specnlations of and booksellers. lim readers who Chose to look, there was a greater confusion. On the lwnd, the colophons ofprinted books made play of books produced lioul the aid of a pen (the Mainz Catholicon is an obvious examp!e92 ),

-

'

48

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, !450-1830

On the other hand, it was not unknown for these very colophons to lw transcribed, word by word. Accordingly, there are anomalous colophonN such as that in the copy of Albrecht von Eyb's Margarita poetica now in New College, datable between 1475 and 1480 and copied in England from the Rome edition of 1475, we are told, 'non calamo: ereove stilo: sed notw
artis ac solerti industrie genere Rome impressa' (fig. 6). 93 Nonsense in OIW

sense, but clear indication of the indifference of the copyist to one medium rather than another. In this instance, the colophon was added probably aN an afterthought, since the hand is different from the main text, and the leaf has been separately ruled for the purpose. Printed and manuscript copies sat amongst each other. The manuscript ofWalter Hilton's Scale ofperfediou now in Trinity College, Cambridge, was written at Sheen in 1499 ~five yean · after Wynkyn de Warde had printed the same text only a few miles away in London. Yet its earliest known owner, who collated several copies ofthis best· selling text, used de Warde's edition for his editorial work. 94 In Germany, the Latin Bibles written out after the mid-1?o50s all have to~- considered in the light of Gutenberg, Schaeffer and their soccessors. Perhaps its innovative nature·made the 42-line Bible especially attractive, copies apparently being · , ' sold so rapidly that Silvio was unable to obtain one even in March 1455. The subsequent succession of printed folio Bibles during the 1460s and early 1470s95 coincides with contilluing manuscript production that is in part at least an economic response to inadequate supply. A lectern Bible written at Wiirzburg in' the late 1460sor early 1470s attests to continuing need not met by the new printed books. 96 A small folio Bible written in Schmolln, in northeast Germany, in 1460, found its way south to the Charterhouse at Erfurt by the mid-1470s, but it.seems to have enjoyed very little useY 7 On the other hand, the continuing power and attractiveness of quite ordinary manuscript copies of standard texts is attested by the great number of survivals dating ·from the last decades of the !ifteenth century. This par.ticular phenomenon is the more notable in the context of a printing trade which in some areas was over-producing and insufficiently organised to accomplish the prompt distribution of its output. It is quite clear, as it remained for later generations in differing ways and to differing degrees, that demand remained for some kinds of mannscripts, arld .that .Gutenberg and his followers did not by any means put all profes,si,onal lrqok:scribes·out ofbusinessY8 , ·li!iil!lhe:nature·ofthis co-existence, which for illustration straddled the mid·fifteerith-ceiit,ury and hence the invention of movable type,h..S been obsc\.ired>by:the separation of,palaeographical and typographical studies in the seven(eehth l:ent1.1ryl9 ana-more recently by two centui!es oflibraryand

Dependent skills

49

ow

Jlj

frn111
110111'

'

.'

,,,
Albrecht von Eyb, Margarita poetica. The colophon (fo.408v), copied tlw e(lition printed by Ulrich Han {Rome, 1475), is ill a different hand from 1f IIll' 1nain scribe, and this part of the leaf has been separately ruled for the · New College, Oxford MS 307.

50

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 1450-1830

museum organisation, by the book trade, and by bibliograph11 .11

ship itself. The drive among booksellers, bibliophiles and majo1 "" ·· '' century libraries alike to separate the printed from the nLll!lt .. 11 libraries for the sake of departmental efficiency, resulted dirccth '" tl,
struction of evidence that demonstrated conclusively the intcrt l1, 111 !'' .11

of manuscript and print in the minds of earlier readers. At Cambridge, Henry Bradshaw, University Librarian and t';L'> iI\ lit, acute student of incunabula of his time, 100 worked in a well , .. ,, tradition. He was responsible for breaking many volumes, but .,,1,1~ done the same before him in the interests oflibrary managemcnl bound originally at the end of the fifteenth century were dislll\'1111 · order that some printed parts might be sold as duplicates, and parts might be removed to the manuscript stacks. 101 Other vol""'"* broken up so that their constituent parts could be.arranged dii'l<·l ' the shelf, according to their printers or dates. Among many, a li·w pies may be quoted. A volume given to the University Library in I containing a manuscript dated 1523 bound up with Suetonius ( Si 1512), Glareanus' Duo elegiarum libri (Basel, 1516) and Carolt/s Historia Baetica (Basel, 1494) has now been dispersed in four, rections - to the manuscript stacks, to the shelves of incunabuiH, different places on the shelves oflater printed books. 102 Another ouslycoherent volume, containing a manuscript copy of a de·vollniiHI written at the London Charterhouse and works printed at Spciel', and Cologne, including. on the leaf of the Colloquium peccatoris rl (Antwerp: Mathias van der Goes, c.-!487) a woodcut image of pity as an indulgence and possibly associated with Caxton's workshop, wise dispersed, the printed according to their printers. 111" Tlw who bound.up an early manuscript Constitutiones provinciales with H of short texts by Dionysius Car_thusianus and Hugo de Sancto Curu Stella clericorum, printed severally in the 1490s at Cologne, An Paris, did so with some religious associations in his mind. 104 The neefled several legal teXts, in manuscript and printed'by John William de Machlinia, was likewise organised. 105 But the person who between two covers half a dozen miscellaneous texts including Mirror of the world, and manuscripts of the Elizabethan statutes · versity of Cambridge and Campion's history of Ireland, dating turyand more later, 106 surely did so for simple tidiness' sake, and su reminder of how the distinctions between manuscript and print ignored in the early seventeenth century. All these books; coherent to their owners in different ways, have since been broken up. Rrtlld,,h,t·lll
<

parts

Dependent skills

~I

a! schola; ineteentl1
lSCript, i 11 in the de

1geability
themosl

ablished ters had 'olume.s ered, in uscript ~s were 1tly on

exami4and :burg, rdus's te dild to !bvi!ook rerp

ijixi
ned ·ke'on

of many people, in libraries and the book trade alike, who saw in such ruptures. It was not simply that manuscript and printed were divorced. The widespread practice ofbinding up manuscripts of i·!IIIUe:nsJLOUtS according to individual need or taste, well-established in 'fi~:eettth century, was just one of many habits that did not die with the of the printed book. The Sammelband, assembled by owner, librarbinder, was a feature familiar to libraries of all sizes, and offers its ·~01mnaer1ta;ry on ways of thought. By dismantling such volumes, the thread is broken. happily, many volumes survive as witnesses of the ways in which and print were used, and often made, side by side. The volume St John's College, Oxford, containing three more or less contembooks printed by Caxton and a manuscript of Lydgate's Siege was closely connected with Caxton's own circles. 107 Private concould be as important as any intellectual or contemporary relabetween the two covers of a volume. One book from the house Br,,th,ren of the Common Life in Cologne offers suggestive evidence an early fifteenth -c"'ntury French manuscript with an edition Chrysostom printed at Brussels in 1479. 108 A 'copy of a Psalter for use printed by the Brethren of the Common Life at Brussel~ was up into a manuscript Breviary belonging to the Nazareth community itself, the printed text adjusted to different local use by means illt·ed-·on slips of paper: the rubrication for both parts is in the same and it is probable that the two parts have been together since the 109 A volume from the library of the AugustiniaJ;J. canons near contains a group of tracts by Bonaventura written out by the scribe de Ympens, and a printed copy of Nicolaus de Ha~apis' Biblia paupeprinted atAntwerp in 149!. 110 A.Putch Plenarium, printed byGovaert t Antwerp in 1496, was provided at an early date with extra narratives Passion and gospels for various days, in a book used by a woman ''"'c<m.m A copy of Terence printed by Mentelin at Strasburg in about was supplemented by extra leaves including a life of the dramatist and !Ulllents to the plays- the whole volume being rubricated in the. same throughout. 112 In libraries, manuscript and print were shelved side by side, and the early Dl!:tc<:nt]h-c:entury libr·ary catalogue of Syon monastery makes abundantly Jlloin how manuscript and printed works co-existed on an equal footing. The catalogue, a document itself-notably more lavishly set out than many others of its kind, adhered to the medieval practice of identifying bo 0~ hy the first words of the second leaf: so far from being distin1gui:shec(:;f!
t111e

52

Print, Manuscript and the Search for Order, 145{}--1830 their novelty, printed books were treated like manuscripts. 113 Much work remains to be done on exploring and analysing contemporary relationshipN between the two media, both for private and institutional libraries, and in the innumerable surviving books in which they may still be seen bound up
as one.

j

In volume after volume, manuscript and print are to be found con· joined even in the mid-seventeenth century, when the political press was a supplement to what was circulated privately, in manuscript. 114 Private need frequendy was at odds with the printing press, and vice-versa. Printed sheets were added to manuscripts, and manuscript leaves were pasted into printed volumes. & late as about 1625, the (probably) Parisian owner of a manuscript Horae, identifiable now only by the initials C S on the covers, arranged to have his or her prayer book rebound. The manuscrip~ a run-of-the-mill example from a late-fifteenth-cerlt1Iryworkshop, and it was now incorporated between the engraved tide-page of L'office de Ia Vierge, and (at the end) the Jesuit Pierre Colon's Oraisons devotes appropriees a toutes sortes d' exercices & actions Chrestiennes, both published by the Paris bookseller Louis Boullenger in 162S.ll5 Simllar '!dmixtures can be f~und amongst literature of most kinds in the eighteenth century. But it is in the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries that this cohabitation is at its most instructive, at a time when each might supplement or complement the other- manuscripts supplementing print, and print supplementing manuscript. In this two-way process there was, and is, no reason to regard one as being superior to the other, or one as being more old-fashioned. The social and e<;onomic factors that played so large a part in the demise of manuscript for most publication are much ' less in evidence when we look at the specific records of private needs and
interests:

·

