Jlow Writing Came About

DENISE~HMANDT-BESSERAT

University of Texas Press Austin

y

/ 1/~
Abridged edition of Before Writing) Volume I: From Counting to Cuneiform Copyright© I992, 1996 by the University of Texas Press All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America First abridged edition, 1996

Requests for permission to reproduce material from this work should be sent to Permissions, -University of Texas Press, Box 7819, Austin, TX 78713-7819.
@The paper used in this publication meets d1e minimUm requirement.<> of American National Standard for Information Sciences- Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39-48-I984.

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING IN PUBLICATION DATA

Schmandt-Besserat, Denise. How writing came about I Denise Schmandt-Besserat.- rst abridged ed. p. em. "Abridged edition of Before Writing, Volume I: From Counting to Ctmeiform." Includes index. ISBN o-292-77704-3 (pbk. : aile paper) 1. Tokens- Middle East. 2. Writing- History. 3. Middle EastAntiquities. I. Schmandt-Besserat, Denise. Before writing. II. Title.
CJ+867.S364 1996

1£! to

Cune~fbrm

To our three grandchildren, who give us such great joy:

NICOLAUS DANIELLE MICHAEL

)fk should be sent to equirements of Ameriof Paper for

X 78713-7819.

~nee

.-Istabridged ed. Counting to

Middle Easting. II. Title.

( :<mtents

Preface

xi
r

Introduction: Tokens, a New Theory

TheMyths 2 The Pictographic Theory 4 Tokens 7
PART ONE: One THE EVIDENCE What Are Tokens?
IS

Types and Subtypes IS Evolution from Plain to Complex IS Materials I7 Manufacture I7 The Token Collection under Study 20
Two Where Tokens Were Handled and Who Used Them 29

Types of Settlements 29 Distribution within Settlements 29 Structures 30 Token Clusters 32 Containers Holding Tokens 32 Associated Assemblages 33 Tokens as Ftmerary Offerings 34
Three Strings of Tokens and Envelopes 39

Strings ofTokens Envelopes 42
Four Impressed Tablets

39

55

Number 55 Context 57

Viii

HOW 'WRITING CAMEABOlJI'

Chronology 57 Description 58 The Signs 58 Beyond the Impressed Tablets: Pictography 68 The Meaning of Signs and Their Corresponding Tokens So The Place ofimprcssed Tablets in the Evolution of Writing 84PART TWO: Five THE INTERPRETATION The Evolution of Symbols in Prehistory

89

Symbols and Signs 89 Lower and Middle Paleolithic Symbols 90 Upper Paleolithic and Mesolithic Symbols 90 Neolithic Symbols 93 A Turning Point in Communication and Data Storage 96
Six Tokens: The Socioeconomic Implications
ror
103

Reckoning Technology and Economy 101 Reckoning Technology and Social Organization
Seven Counting and the Emergence of Writing
rn

The Various Modes of Counting III The Sumerian Philological Evidence II3 The Near Eastern Archaeological Data II4Eight Conclusions: Tokens, Their Role in Prehistory and Their Contribution to Archaeology 123

Economy 123 Political Stmcmre 123 Mathematics 124 Communication 124
PART THREE: THE ARTIFACTS

Cones 128 Spheres 131 Disks 133 Cylinders 137 Tetrahedrons 139 Ovoids 14-1 Quadrangles 14-3 Triangles 14-5 Biconoids 14-7 Paraboloids 14-8 Bent Coils 14-9

ography 68 xresponding

Ovals/Rhomboids 150 Vessels 151 Tools 15+ Animals 155 Miscellaneous 157
Notes 159

CONTENTS

ix

1e Evolution

Glossary 89

183

tory

Index

185

)Ols 90 vmbols 90

1

and Data
ror
103

ations

ny IOI )rganization
III

'iting

m

e 113 ata 114Prehistory
~ology

1

123

Preface

published in 1992 by the University of Texas Press. That work was issued in rwo volmnesI: From Counting to Cuneiform and II: A Catalog ofNear Eastern Tokensand was addressed primarily to specialists. The purpose of the present abridgment is to offer the general reader a less detailed and more affordable book. I have made no changes in tills volmne except for variations in editing, n1inor corrections, and updating a few references. How Writing Came About constitutes the first comprehensive study of Near Eastern tokens to be aimed at a general audience. Based on the analysis and interpretation of a selection of eight thousand specimens frmn 116 sites in Iran, Iraq, the Levant, and Turkey, it documents the llrunediate precursor of the cuneiform script, the world's first writing system. The material, dating from 8ooo to 3000 B.C. and mostly tmpublished before, was collected and studied firsthand in thirty musemns in fifteen countries. Also included here is my systematic study of the 200 envelopes, used to keep tokens in archives, and the 240 impressed tablets now known. These rwo types of objects illustrate the major steps in the transition from tokens to writing. The tokens from early excavations often lack a precise stratigraphy. Even so, the large assemblage presented here gives a reliable picture of the types and subtypes of the counters, their geographic and chronological distribution, their evolution over time, and the transition from tokens to writing. This book is organized into three parts, as follows.
PART ONE: THE EVIDENCE

THIS BOOK IS AN ABRIDGED version of Before Writing,

The first rwo chapters are devoted to the docun1entation of the archaeological material. Chapter r describes the counters, tl1eir shapes, markings,
and manufacture, and their evolution from "plain" to "complex" tokens.

Chapter 2 identifies the context in which the tokens were used: ilie type of settlements to which they belonged; tl1eir spacial distribution within those

Xii

HOW WRITING Cfu\.1E ABOUT

settlen1ents; the structures and assemblages with which they were associated. Special attention is given to the rare tokens found in tombs. Chapter 3 describes the fourth-millennium methods for holding tokens in archives -in particular, the envelopes. The following topics are covered: discovery of the envelopes, their number, geographic distribution, chronology, and conteA1:, the assemblages of tokens they held, the markings they bore, and their role in the transmutation of tokens into writing. Chapter 4- deals with impressed tablets. After a review of the history of their discovery, their number, geographic distribution, chronology, and context, the documents and the signs they bear are described and their contribution to writing is assessed.
PART TWO: THE INTERPRETATION

The last three chapters analyze the role of tokens in the evolution of comn1unication, social structures, and cognitive skills. These interpretations are tentative. There is no doubt that some of the conclusions will have to be revised in the future, when more and better data will be available. In Chapter 5, tokens are interpreted as the second step in the development of record keeping, following Paleolithic tallies. The token was the first code to record economic data, providing the immediate background for the invention of writing. Chapter 6 shows how the econ9my determined the token system and how, in turn, the counters had an impact on society. Chapter 7 discusses the evolution of counting and its role in the invention of writing. Tokens are shown to reflect an archaic mode of "concrete counting," while writing derived from abstract counting. In the Conclusions, I smmnarize the wealth of information provided by tokens on communication, 1nathematics, economy, social stnKtures, and cognitive skills in-prehistoric Near Eastern cultures.
PART THREE: THE ARTIFACTS

The charts in Part Three provide a graphic representation of the sixteen types of tokens and their subtypes. For more information, the reader is invited to consult the complete listing of tokens and the photographic documentation in Before Writing, Volume II: A Catalog of Near Eastern Tokens.

.I\ 1kcns, a New Theory

INTRODUCTION

d 1Hil '1 d!'l't'lojJJIII'IJI and the growth of civilizations have depended, in the main,
i!H j!i if!f/'(11' In tt .fh!' actiFities- the discovery offire) domestication ofanimals) the f#/J!i!/rl/1 o(/a{JOI\' lmt, a{}()JJC all, in the evolution of means to receive, to commu!lllilil'< 11111ilo l'l'flll'ti

his "now/edge, and especially in the development ofphonetic
-COLIN CHERRY 1

il'fil f!{ll·
~I' i'. i·! !I!., 'I'IH: UNIVERSAL WAY

by which humans communicate and

"·"''·'1'1'1 1 '· t'peritncc, fades instantly: before a word is fully pronounced it

II!

olif<Wiy vnnished forever. Writing, the first technology to make tbe spo\Y< il'd permanent, changed tbe hmnan condition.

It

Wi\N 1\

revolution in communication when a script allowed individuals

llliili'IJ

inlbrrnation without meeting face to face. Writing also made it to store information, creating a pool of knowledge well beyond ability of any single hwnan to master yet, at tbe same time, available to Wrlihl!!o)·'-!:eg~1rded as the thres old of histor , because it ended tbe Up(-lll oral tradition, with. all the inacruraoes this entailed. Business i\\.111111\i.stmtion are now inconceivable witbout bookkeeping to balance , ;\nd expenditures. Finally, among the innumerable benefits created 1 _ Wt'iti.rtt:L~?-~.~-~§-!?.-£<!1tr~S-Q~jde~?en they. arise and, in - _and scnltinize, revise, add, subtfaCt, anCCrectTfi'ti1tm to ar, of logic and a depth of thought that would otherwise be

.·did writing come about? It is now generally agreed tbat writing
liWilllt~d in Mesopotamia, present-day Iraq, in~ l~!l<u!_th~mg~ 11,11,' and spread from tbere to Egypt, Elam, and t!l"e It1dus Valley. 3 It
J f!,CIICJ"ally agreed that otber scripts developed later, independently, in 0~1 ~llld Mcsoamerica. 4 The origk of ChineSe and Mesoamerican writIN still enigmatic. In tbis book, I will presenttbj; archaeological evidence ..

11 te Mc~c)p_?~~~~~tS~~---fJ;~gL~ . M~-~fing device:__

-~

--------~-~----

itlllttediatC precursor of the cuneiform script was a syste1n of tokens-

'I d:1y counters of many shapes which served for counting and accow1tli l\' goods in the prehistoric cultures of the Near East. The idea tbat Mt.·>;(lpul'ltmian writing e1nerged from a counting device is new. Until the t·igillc'c'lllh eentury, the origin of writing 'Yas the S\lbject of mxtJ>~ crediting w H h, l\1\ n1lous creai:ure~~·-o~_ ll(i_O"e; f~;-its-T;~~~tio~.-·Th~~-~,.-~·-tne·xge--6£-·-~ i'lilq·,lllcllmcnt, the die-o~yth~t s~st;,:t~d~li:b. ~nrre writing was put

liw,

2

HOW WRITING CAME ABOUT

forward. This vinv endured until the present. 5 In the following pages, I will
show how the conception of the origin of writing evolved through time.

THE MYTHS

The oldest account of the invention of writing is perhaps that of the Sumerian epic Enmerkar and the Lord ofAratta.' The poem relates how En-

merkar, the lord of Umk-Kulaba, sent an emissary to the lord of Aratta
soliciting timber, gold, silver, lapis lazuli, and precious stones to rebuild the

residence of the goddess Inanna. Back and forth the messenger delivered word for word the pleas, threats, and challenges between the two lords, until the day Emnerkar's instructions were too difficult for the emissary to memorize. The lord ofKulaba promptly invented writing, tracing his message on a clay tablet: -The emissary, his mouth (being) heavy, was not able to repeat (it). -Because the emissary, his mouth (being) heavy, was not able to repeat (it), -The lord of Kulaba patted clay and wrote the message like (on a present-day) tablet- Formerly, the writing of messages on clay was not established-Now, with Utu's bringing forth the day, verily this was so, -The lord ofKulaba inscribed tl1c message like (on a present-day) tablet, this, verily, was so. 7 One might add here that, according to the Sumerian king list, Enmerkar lived about 2700 B.C., when writing had been a common practice for five hundred years. Of course this casts doubts on tl1e acmal contribution of Enmerkar to the inven~i ofWriting! In a second Smneri o n Inanna and Enki, the Transfer of the Arts of --zs;iliZ~~~-E;.idu to rech, writing is conceived as one of a hundred basic elements of civilization held by Enki, the lord of wisdom. 8 Inanna coveted the divine decrees for her city, Urulc, and set her mind to getting them. This was done when Enki, drunk, donated to her each and every one of the crafts. In Samuel Noah Kramer's words: Mter their hearts had become happy with drinks, Enki exclain1s: ... ~' ... 0 name of my power, 0 name of my power, To the bright Inanna, my daughter, I shall present ... The arts of woodworking, mctalworlting, writing, toolmalcing, leatherworlcing, ... building, basketweaving."
Pure lnanna took them. 9

Inanna loaded writing and tl1e other divine decrees onto tl1e Boat of Heaven and started an eventful journey back to Uruk. After overcoming
tempests and sea monsters, sent by Enki to recapture his possessions, she

the f()llm\ 111~ f)-lgl'."· l \\·iii ~ c1·oh·cl1 through rlllK.
·i

,. I,., I II~< ,

1t 1·,

11·hcre

she unloaded her precious booty to the de-

INTRODUCTION

3

r,,,

1

.,,,

.J, 1

~ ~';(:rluf'S riut oi" the .'-;\l he poem rL-LHc'i h(_l\\ En ;u:· to the lord or :-\r~ltt.l ·ious stones to rebuild the the messenger dcliH-rcd ~ between the two lords, fficulr for the emissarv to l 1\Titing, tracing his nlCs-

Oannes, a sea creature with the hc.td, !l-et, and voice of a man, gave to the Babyloni; li· ! , ,, ·\\ I·, 1.:·.· , d II Tit tttg, language, science, and crafts of all types. 10 In .d;' · 1; ;I ·\ I·" 11.111 1,.\ 1·., 1hr god Ea, the lord ofvirisdom, \VJ.S the source of di , , , , 1 11; IJ'.I· .II I·. 111 1\\' lrdgr, \\'riting in particular. 11 In Assyria, Nabu, son , d '\ 1 ;: , r, 11 11 ,1'. 11 \ ,.1,., l .t·; 1he itlstTuctor of mankind in all arts and crafts, 12 H<, 11 i' I!! 1il I q 1111 !111) ', .. q·,1 ll 1 d ll!l'c, ~md writing. l!i 11" l\il+l· t ;~~~ltnc,tlnl his will to mankind with the Tables of the l \\\ '·' 1 1111 11 l i\ 11 w lltt)-',l'l' 1d' ( ;od." l.l The source of great debates,I 4 these -<ldlth \ \ j I· l!lli'l!lll'lvd l'\' Danit·llkf()c as meaningthat"thetwoTablcs, Will H-i i Iii !11!' 1 111p,n 1 11' ( ;od i11 Mount 5Nnai, was the first Writing in the
, l··-l1 111, I 11 H'

.,.r,,,,,

I·· l'.,·l,l'>'>tl.'>, Nal~vloniaca,

Iii,'"'.!
not able to repeat (it) .

ilidl

,dl <>iiH'ii\lpliotl>cls cbivc H·om the Hebrew"(fig.

1). 15

Oth-

.vy, was not able to re-

: message like (on a

,ls nor establishedly this 1vas so, e (on a present-day)

~rian king list, Enmerkar :ommon practice for five 1e actual contribution of

the 1ramfer of the Arts of ved as one of a hundred ord of wisdom. 8 Inanna I set her mind to getting ·o her each ;md every one

Enki exclaims: ower, :.:nt ... ng, toolmaking,

~s,

Fig. 1. Title page of Daniel Defoe's An
Essay upon Literature

ecrecs onto the Boat of Urulc After overcoming ture his possessions, she

(London: Thomas Bowles, i 726). Courtesy Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, University of Texas at Austin.

4

HOW WRITING CAME ABOUT

ers credited Adan1 as the inventor of writing. In r668, John Wilkins, one of

the founders of the Royal Society and an influential and respected English scholar, 10 commented that Adam had invented the Hebrew alphabet: "though not im1nediatcly after his creation, yet in process of time, upon his experience of their great necessity and usefulness." 17 The myths, from Sumer to Daniel Defoe, share one common characteristic: they present writing as emerging, on one day, as a full-fledged script. None of them conveys the notion of an evolution from a simple to a n1ore complex system of communication. The concept of a ready-made alphabet handed down fron1 heaven persisted until the eighteenth century.
THE PICTOGRAPHIC THEORY

~1'1i

lj;J.,,s,1

--

.. ~::~pts~?~~i~~~~Y ~e~~~?.P~~f~o_;n ~~~I~~-~ye ~E.~~}9gLill'Uin~d:rl~se / picU.lies became riiOi-e alld ffiore simplified and developed into abstract characters. The theory was presented in Warburton's book, Divine Legation ofMoses, published in London in 1738. 18 The ideas made their way into Dii derot and d'Ale1nbcres Encyclupidie, in the article entitled "Ecriture," which I gave them a wide diffusion." Warburton's pictographic theory remained \ practically lmchallenged for over two hundred years. For example, in the revised edition of A Study of Writing (1974), at present one of the bestknown modern scholarly publications on writing, L J. Gelb still stated: "it became clear that the Mesopotamian cuneiform writing has developed ...., from a pictographic stage." 20 --? Although the existence of ~~m had been noticed by Western trav-~ elers as early as the fifteenth century, ancient Near Eastern scripts did not play a role in the elaboration of the pictographic theory because they were still little known in 1738. In the nineteenth century, when archaeological expeditions reaped tl1e first great harvests of cuneiform texts and brought them back to Europe, the cuneiform script was regarded as conforming to Warburton's paradigm. In 1913, George A. Barton was of the opinion that "the investigator must proceed upon the hypotl1esis that Babylonian writing, like other primitive writing, originated in pictographs." The pictographic theory scheme was modified, however, to include a three-step progression frmn ideographic to phonetic writing. "Indeed/' wrote Barton, "wherever the beginnings of writing could be traced, it took the form of picture writing, so tl1at it seems safe to regard it as a working hypothesis, if not as a law, that all early systems of writing began in a series of pictographic ideographs, tlut syllabic values were developed from these and in some cases alphabetic values." 21 In fact, the idea tlut tl1e cuneiform script started with picture writing was by no means a perfect fit. In 1928, a year before the discovery of the Uruk tablets, William A. Mason noted,~~W~Jll.lJ§.~.a.~is__~~th~ _J

1

In the eighteenth cenn1ry, William Warburton, bishop of Gloucester, introduced the first evolutionary theory of writing. Based on his observations of Egyptian, Chinese, and Aztec manuscripts, Warburton argued that all

)68, John VVilkins, one of

i<1l and respected English I the Hebrc\\' .1\p\ubet: process of time, upon his

'one common characrcr-

y, as a full-fledged script.
fl·om a simple to a more )fa rt\ldy-made alphabet teenth century.

most ::trchaic inscriptions discovered, it is ~~?t always easy to ''i',11i·n.· the original objects.'' The pictographic theo~)r, however, was !H \, 1 1 lllt'sl'i<mcd. Instead, the Babylonian scribes wer_e_ l:Jlamed fqr t~~e d~s~- ! !f Jl,tllr\' hclwccn _ p!:_e_conceived ideas and facts: __ ~'Owing to the lin1itations 1,1 1lj 1rt1it ivc culture, rile ·rnexp-eflenceOf the-sC~ibes and the lack of artistic .11,1111 v, each scribe drew the characters in his own crude, faulty way, often i111 , ll'ln·tly; so that it is quite impossible always definitely to distinguish the ; 11,1! o~l'llT ~111d identify it with the object intended." 22 I 'Ill· season of 1929-1930 at Un1k brought considerable new information ,dH Ill( the beginning of writing. Hundreds of archaic tablets wetyllil~ --~-.
\1111'',1 .111d
i 1,

INTRODUCTION

5

!'dtlltl'd thnt pushed writing back to the fourth millennium B.C.fSigns ) 11 ,\l vd or impressed with a stylus in a technique different ±fom the Cu~ 1<" "' ;:cript had been termed pictographic. These archaic tablets, however,
1 111

hop of Gloucester, introed on his observations of rburton argued that all ::;s. In time, he said, these developed into abstract .1's book, Divine Legation made their vvay into Dintitlcd "Ecriture," which ~raphic theory remained ars. For example, in the present one of the bestI. J. Gelb still stated: "it writing has developed

Jtradictcd the pictographic theory. Ada1n Falkenstein, the German ,,\ l11 1L1r who studied the texts, noted that when writing began in Mesopo! illlli<l 1 truly pictorial signs were rare exceptions. Those that were tndy pic!ori.d1 like the signs for "plow,'' "chariot," "sledge," or "wild boar," were 11111 i)llly i-Cw but ofnncommon use, represented by a single occurrence on 23 I !lit' ctblct alone. The common signs were abstract: the sign for "metal" \\';l~i >I rrcsccnt with five lines; the "pictograph" for ''sheep" was a circle with
1

t '"'·"·The Uruk tablets seriously strained the pictograph theory by showing that· when writing began in Mesopotamia pictographic signs were rarely
itll'tL

(l,dward Chiera and others tried to reconcile Falkenstein's observations

\Vith the pictographic theory. They argued that the Uruk texts represented
ill! ,drcady evolved script and that a previous stage, consisting of true pic-

tllf',l';tphs, probably had been written on a perishable material, such as
wood, bark, papyrus, or parchment which had disintegrated in time and t:(il!ltltlcvcr be recovered. 24 Tht~ next excavation campaign at Urulc, in I930-193I, produced im-

noticed by Western travr Eastern scripts did not heory because they vverc ~ry, when archaeological iform texts and brought ~arded as conforming to \vas of the opinion that ;is that Babylonian writ'ictographs." The pictoinclude a three-step pro'Indeed," wrote Barton, ced, it took the fonn of a working hypothesis, if ;;an in a series of pictoloped frmn these and in

tablets which continued to challenge the pictographic theory. These
l't'\l.'i, like others found previously at Susa and later at Khafaje, Godin Tepe,

IVhtri, Tell Brak, Habuba Kabira, and Jebel Aruda, were more ancient than fhr "pictographic" Uruk tablets studied by Falkenstein. They were, how\'Vrr, not made of wood, bark, papyrus, or parchment, as Chiera had hy. ,.,.,, t. ·.·.,,;iz···L

This earliest form of writing consisted of wedges, circles, ovals,

tl'iangles impressed on clay tablets and was anything but pictographic. gulf between the evidence and the neat charts of pictographs illustrated
_lH!<Jks became even wider.

l!y the second half of the twentieth century, enough data had accwnupresent a serious challenge to the pictographic theory. From Chamllllon in 1822 to Ventris in 1953, each great decipherment eroded the prem' upon which the pictographic theory was built and determined that the f'ill'i)' scripts all had phonetic features. Anthropologists like Andre Leroi( it Hid t:\11 entered the debate, warning against preconceptions about prirniliW picture writings. In his volume Le Geste et Ia parole, he argued that "the
10

:ed with picture writing Ore the discovery of the : admit, that even in the

6

HOW YVRITING CAME ABOUT

linguists who have studied the origin of writing have often conferred to pictographic systen1s a value which derives from literacy." Leroi-Gourhan noted that the only true pictographic scripts were recent phenomena; that most had emerged in groups which did not have vvriting prior to contacts with travelers or colonists from literate countries. He concluded: "therefore it seems in1possible to use Eskimo or Indian pictography in order to understand the ideography of preliteratc societies." 25 Scholars began to question the idea that writing emerged as the rational decision of a group of enlightened individuals, such as that put forward by V. Gordon Childe in What Happened in History: "the priests ... have agreed upon a conventional method of recording receipts and cxpendinrres in written signs that shall be intelligible to all their colleagues and successors; they have invented writing." 26 For, like other human inventions, writing I did not come ex nihila and, in Chiera's words, "there never was a first man who could sit down and say, 'Now I am going to write.' That supreme achievement of mankind, the one which makes possible the very existence of civilization by transferring to later generations the acquisitions of the earlier ones, was the result of a slow and natural devclop1nent." 27 Above all, the pictographic theory-wasnotconsist~~'t witlimodern archaeological research. In recent years, Near Eastern excavations have focused on the beginning of agrimln1re and cities and have tried to determine how these events affected society. Viewed in the perspective of the urban phenomenon, the first "pictographic" tablets ofUmk (and for that matter the earlier impressed tablets) are out of step with other socioeconomic developments. These first documents occur in level IVa ofUrnk, lagging far behind the rise of cities and d1e emergence of the temple instirntion, which was already welltmder way some two hundred years earlier (in levels XIV). If writing emerged so late, it could not have played a role in state formation. How, then, did the Mesopotamian city-states function without record keeping? Although popular books have continued to present the traditional pictographic d1eory, 28 as early as the 1950s scholars had begun to anticipate d1e discovery of an antecedent of the Mesopotamian script. Some, like V. Gordon Childe, searched for it in ~e s-Wh!le-others looked into potter's marks, but to no avail. 29 Most, like ton ~d, foresaw an even earlier script: "The degree of competence .. ,-[attained by script of the Uruk: IV tablets] ... suggests that earlier stages in its development may eventually be recognized elsewhere, perhaps in levels corresponding to Uruk: V and VI." 30 David Diringer simply referred to "another more primitive writing" or "an at present unknown, early script, which may have been the common ancestor of [the Indus Valley Script and] also of the cuneiform and early ( Elamite writings." 31 ~se that the antecedent of writing W_!_~--~E!~_) /(1 ~~~~c!gi-'.S What had een missed-or clis1 missed- were the humble tokens that had been used for centuries and that ·'' were, I argue, the immediate precursor to writing. I The pictographic theory will remain a landmark in the history of ideas

l~Vrll

(

!Hill,

li;H t
\\TI
/j(jj

i

lkt

; have often conferred to literacy." Leroi-Gourhan e recent phenomctu; that \:YTiting prior to contacts He concluded: ''therefore 1graphy in order to under~

Iii··"''"-"'' it was the first evolutionary explanation of writing, departing from
lill'lll<'l' bdiefthat a full-fledged script had been communicated to lmhv divine revelation. The theory was based, however, on Egyptian, _!lilt'.'·~\ ;llld New World 1nodels that were irrelevant. Over the course of 1 wcmicth century, archaeology has generated new evidence that contradh ted 1"11e paradigm. At the same time, excavations steadily produced small jtikt'!lN t·hat, as I will show, were the antecedent of writing.

INTRODUCTION

7

1g emerged as the rational Lch as that put fonvard by the priests ... have agreed ipts and expenditures in :olleagues and successors; rman inventions, writing tere never was a iirst man to write.' That supreme ossible the very existence ts the acquisitions of the evelopment." 27 nsistent with modern ar:ern excavations have fod have tried to determine perspective of the urban )ruk (and for that matter other socioeconomic deIVa of Uruk, lagging far :emplc institution, which 'Cars earlier (in levels Xve played a role in state y-states function without

TOKillNS

;f!iv immediate precursor of cuneiform writing was a system of tokens.
'l'h<'~<t small <=;aebjec:'__~Q.l'Jl'"lf"s~-:;; cones, spheres, disks, cylinders, tiH\ served· as counters in the prehistoric Near East and can be traced to
!Iii'

_.· ·. .

Neolithic period, starting about 8ooo B.C. They evolved to meet the ~-----··---· -··-- -··----------------~---of the economy, at first keeping track of the products of farming, itll expanding in the urban age to keep track of goods manufacmred in ll'kshops. The development of tokens was tied to the rise of social strucrt:s, emerging with rank leadership and coming to a climax with state

Also, corresponding to the increase in bureaucracy, methods of storing I , in archives were devised. One of these storage methods employed envelopes, simple hollow clay balls in which the tokens were placed sealed. A drawback of the envelopes was that they hid the enclosed , . Accountants evenmally resolved the problem by imprinting the · of the tokens on the surface of the envelopes prior to enclosing . The number of units of goods was still expressed by a corresponding 'rn11nlhcr of markings. An envelope containing seven ovoids, for example, ll'~~ seven oval markingS:~·--"\_ \ Pourth-millennium ac2b:tl!)J:ahts s06rr'?e'ilized that the tokens within ilie
'""''·lno1t.< were made unnecessary by the presence of markings on the outer

'The

~-~~fyi~~-~{Q(~o~~ iv~~-~--~~-~~~:-~~ing.

\(

_! __ _

I
i
I

esent the traditional pied begtm to anticipate the cript. Some, like V GorJked into potter's marks, w an even earlier script: script of the U mk IV ·lopment may eventually ponding to Uruk V and more primitive writing" y have been the common the cuneiform and early tt of writing was not ag l been missed- or dis- -· ed ±Or cennrries and that

As a result, tablets- solid clay balls bearing markings- replaced

or

k in the history of ideas

hollow envelopes filled with tokens. These markings became a system 'their own which developed to include not only impressed markings but ll'\lll'e legible signs traced with a pointed stylus. Both of these types of symh( Ji.s, which derived from tokens, were picture signs or "pictographs." They were not, however, pictographs of the kind anticipated by Warburton. The tilg.ns were not pictures of the items they represented but, rather, pictures the tokens used as counters in the previous accounting system. What fascinated me most in this smdy was the realization that the tokenl M)'Ntcm. reflected an archaic mode of"concrete'' counting prior to the inventltlll of abstract nwnbers. There were no tokens for "r" or "ro." Instead, a particular counter was needed to account for each type of goods: jars of oil i were counted with ovoids, small measures of grain with cones, large mea- ) NUI'es of grain with spheres. Tokens were used in one-to-one correspondl'ncc: one jar of oil was shown by one ovoid, two jars of oil by two ovoids,

0

l!O\V \VIUTINU Ci\Mn i\IIOU'l'

ill

t'l\', 'I'IH.' l~(H\Nt.:qul'tll'CN (lr tl1is disc<wcry arc signifkant. Namely, writing re~adred 1101· only Ji·om new bureaucratic demands but from the invention of abstTact I.Xlllnting. '!'he most important evidence tmcovered is that counting

wa.s not, as f·(mncrly assumed, subservient to writing; on the·contrary, writing emerged fron1 counting.
Studies on Tokens

Tokens ca1nc n1y way by chance. It all started in I969-I97I, when I was awarded a fellowship from the Radcliffe Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts (now the Bunting Instimte) to smdy the use of clay before pottery in the Near East. Tllls led me to systematically examine Near Eastern archaeological clay collections, dating from 8ooo to 6ooo B.C., stored in museums of the Near East, North Africa, Europe, and North America. I was looking for bits of Neolithic clay floors, hearth lining, and granaries, for bricks, beads, and figurines, and I found plenty of these. I also came across a category of artifacts that I did not expect: miniature cones, spheres, disks, tetrahedrons, cylinders, and other geometric shapes made of clay. I noted their shape, color, manufacture, and all possible characteristics. I counted them, measured them, drew sketches of them, and entered them into my files under the heading ''gemnetric objects." Later, when it became obvious that not all the artifacts were in geometric form, but smne were in the shape of animals, vessels, tools, and other commodities, the word was changed to token. I became increasingly puzzled by the tokens because, wherever I would go, whether in Iraq, Iran, Syria, Turkey, or Israel, they were always present among the early clay assemblages. If they were so widely used, they must ( have had a useful function. I noted that thee-~~~~~¢___, ).-.F_it:f:5.Nt: a;1dthat ~hey 'Yen:.tl~S.fi~t _slay_obi<:Sts.t<:J~av~oee11 harde11_sd bL l fire. The factthat people went to snchttouble for their preparation further \_;,~sted that thefwereoflinporrailc(;_:'flletolens appeared to be part of i a system, for I repeatedly found small and large cones, thin and thick disks, \ small and large spheres- even fractions of spheres, snch as half and three\ quarter spheres. But what were the tokens used for? r I asked archaeologists about the tokens and learned that everyone who had excavated early sites had encountered the1n in their trenches. No one, i -------____.,...-~~\\''C"""'-·m!'\V_'Yh;!J:_t;!'ey_w-!'':~c~ looked in site reports and noted that tokens were usually omitted or relegated to such headings as "en~_sm_~.~!-~-~ jects" or "objects of uncertain purpose._" The authors who did -risk an interpretatiori identified the tO~kCns as amulets or game pieces. Carletori Coon is among those who simply wondered. He jovially reported about the five cones he found at Belt Cave, Iran, as follows: "From levels n and rz cmne five mysterious conical clay objects, looking like nothing in the world but suppositories. VVhat they were used for is anyone's guess." 32 The data I collected on tokens seemed at first to be of little significance, but ultimately made it possible to recognize the importance of these arti1 1

icant. Namely, vvriting rebut from the invention or In covered is that counting ing; on the contrary, ·writ-

that\

on the Neolithic counters turned out to be the piece finally, gave a clue to the entire picture.

INTRODUCTION

9

~!'"""""!'

n r969-197I, \vhen I was e, Cambridge, Massachu' of clay before pottery in inc Near Eastern archaeo) B.C., stored in museums th America. I was looking and granaries, fOr bricks, I also cmne across a catecones, spheres, disks, tetmade of clay. I noted their :teristics. I com1ted them, ~ed them into my files unn it became obvious that :on1e were in the shape of :he word was changed to

t!lFt!l:ntcolt>gist·s., starting with Jacques de Morgan at Susa (1905) and Uruk ( 1929 ), should be recognized for excavating, prcserv[1Hblishing tokens, even though they seemed insignificant at the · L. Broman is to be credited for including in her work the study ·of tokens from Janno. 33 VVhen Broman completed her thesis 11hc too had no alternative but to guess from the shape of the objects I might have been. Consequently, she attributed a different functo Ci\Ch particular type. She viewed the cones as being perhaps schellgudncs and the spheres as sling stones or marbles. She also earcones, spheres, and hemispheres as possible counters, noting that shepherds today keep track of tl1eir flocks with pebbles. 34 At the !tel' insight could not be supported by archaeological evidence. Only later, however, the use of colmters in the ancient Near East was

ecause, wherever I would they were always present o widely used, they must 'VVere often Inant~factured _, to hai~ 5e~n harder1ed by_. · their preparation fi.1rther :ns appeared to be part of )nes, thin and thick disks, :s, such as half and three)r? arned that everyone who n their trenches. No _one, eports and noted that to:adings as "enigmatic ob_-_ ors who did risk an inter: pieces. Carleton Coon is r reported about the five ·om levels n and r2 cmne rrothing in the world but s guess.'' 32 o be of little significance, importance of these arti-

A. Leo Oppenheinl of tl1e University of Chicago wrote an article <:ountcrs of the second millennium B.C. which proved to be the key to [\d<:l'st:an-dirtgwhat the tokens were. 35 His paper concerned a peculiar hoitablet recovered in the late 1920s at the site of Nuzi, in northern Iraq 2)." This egg-shaped tablet belonged, together with a normal tablet an accolmt of the same transaction, in the family archive of a sheep named Puhisenni. 37 The cuneiform inscription on the hollow tablet as follows: Counters representing small cattle:
21 ewes tl1at lamb 6 female lambs Hfull grown male sheep +male lambs 6 she-goats that kid 1 he-goat 1 female kids

The seal of Ziqarru, the shepherd. 38 When opening the hollow tablet, the excavators found it to hold forty-nine counters which, as stipulated in the text, corresponded to the number of animals listed. 39 That hollow tablet proved to be the Rosetta stone of the token system.

10

HOW WRITING CA1lEABOUT

Fig. 2. "Hollow tablet,"
Nuzi, Iraq. Courtesy

Ernest Lachernan.

The counters (Akkadian abnu, pl. abnati, translated "stone" by Oppenheim), the list of animals, and the explanatory cuneiform text leave no possible doubt that at Nuzi cmmters were used for accounting. Although no other example of a umeiform tablet holding cmmters has ever been encountered in Nuzi or, for that matter, in Mesopotamia or the Near East, Oppenheim made a case that abnati were commonly used in the bureaucracy. He suggested that each animal of a flock was represented by a stone held in a container. The tokens were transferred to various receptacles to keep track of changes of shepherds or pasture, when animals were shorn, and so on. He based his argrnnent on short cuneiform notes found in archives, referring to abnati "deposited," "transferred," and "removed" as follows: -These sheep are with PN; the (pertinent) stones have not been yet deposited. -Three lambs, two yow1g he-goats, the share ofPN, they are charged to his account (but) not deposited among the stones. -One ewe belonging to PN, its stone has not been removed. -Altogether 23 sheep of Silwatesup, PN brought ... their stones have not been transferred. - x ewes that have lambed, without (pertaining) stones, belonging to PN. 40 Marcel Sigrist has pointed out further texts which probably also allude to counters in the Third Dynasty ofUr, ca. zooo B.C. For instance, a tablet dealing with oxen reads: "The remaining part of the account is held in the leather pouch" (Sumerian: Kus du 10 -gan)Y

\\'h;tn Oppenheim wrote his article, no one la1ew what the counters llltr, ( H\:oursc, the abnati mentioned in the texts were not described ilii!'H' ltcld in the Nuzi hollow tablet were lost. They were simply re111 ;L'i ~~pebbles" in the site report, with no infornution as to their lH' i IH' rnatt~rial of which they were made. 42 The next important piece PI !/'!.It-' was provided by Pierre Amiet in Paris.
·

INTRODUCTION

11

·

!P AHih:t swdicd seals used in the administration of ancient Near EastHili Ut't'N to validate docmnents. In particular, he came to study the im-

:lated "stone" by Oppcn· neifOrm text leave no pos~ accounting. Although n<) ters has ever been encounorthc Near East, Oppcnx{ in the bureaucracy. He ntcd by a stone held in a receptacles to keep track s were shorn, and so on. fOund in archives, referloved" as fOllows:

nes have not been yet

>fPN, they arc charged
~stones.

)Cen removed. ht ... their stones have ) stones, belonging

ch probably also allude c. For instance, a tablet e account is held in the

of' such seals on globular clay objects from Susa. These artifacts II! lilt IIV and contained small clay objects. Following Oppenheim's lead, !!iterprctcd the small clay objects endosed in the day envelopes as I'Cprcscnting commodities. 43 The proposition was daring, since ~il!iil envelopes came two thousand years earlier than the Nuzi egglitblct, with no known example in the interval. It was a leap of great ,m lt'LH '"" l'br three reasons. First, the corn1ters were revealed: they were :nLiil\111''" dny artifacts modeled in various, mostly geometric, shapes. Sectile I:! usa envelopes showed that counters held in envelopes were not 1 . .I to the literate period but extended into the time before writing iith'lltcd. Third, Amiet foresaw tlte possibility that tlte calculi were an of writing. In his words: "One might ask whetlter [tl1e scribe] ill mind the little objects tltat were enclosed in the envelopes, and tlut t'tHIVCiltionally would symbolize certain goods." 44 contribution was a tremendous step, but it revealed only one lhunc of the token system at a particular location: namely, Susa about II,C. It should be kept in mind tltat in 1966, prehistoric tokens were ktt!l\VIl and the only published parallels to the Susa envelopes were rcc:mtly excavated in Urulc 45 Six years later, in 1972, whenAmiet pubtile Susa envelopes in his Glyptique susienne, he still described the · ngs on envelopes as follows: "a series of round or long notches, similu lite ciphers featured on tablets and corresponding to the munber of 1li L'tldosed inside. The shape of the notches, however, is not as varied {!1.11 11f the calculi." 46 More recently, Alniet summarized his position: "I . lit Its wondering whetlter writing was inspired by certain of these calculi I I in the envelopes."" M.tlll'kc Lambert, conservator of Western Asiatic antiquities at the ITL', took Amiet's insight two steps farther. He clearly recognized that . lit·,t impressed signs of writing were reproducing tlte shape of the for1' v;1lcu\i: "Writing, here as elsewhere, imitated true things." 48 Conse'"''''"'""· he assigned the values r, ro, 6o, 6oo, and 3,6oo to, respectively, the , ltnlmn, sphere, large tetrahedron, punched tetrahedron, and large r ., a route that turned out to have been, partly, a false one. \ II tr recognition tltat the tokens constituted an accotmting system which (!'il1.il'd !(>I' five thousand years in prehistory and which was widely used in !IH ,., 11 ire Ncar East was to be my own contribution. I was also able to draw
lll!i

12

HOW WRITING CAME ABOUT

II

parallels between the shapes of the tokens and those of the first incised signs of writing and to establish the continuity between the two recording systems. Finally, much later, I realized the mathematical importance of the tokens as an archaic reckoning device, preceding the invention of abstract counting. I recall vividly when, in 1970, two pieces of the puzzle snapped together for n1e. In order to prepare a class lecture, I pulled from my files Amict's 1966 article, which I had not seen since I began collecting tokens. I could not believe 1ny eyes when I saw the small clay cones, spheres, and tetral1edrons illustrating the paper. Until then, I had instinctively dis1nissed the idea that the Susa artifacts could have anything to do with the tokens which had been found in Neolithic villages. Mter all, the calculi from Susa were held in envelopes and the Neolithic tokens were loose; moreover, the objects were separated by thousands of years. The next day, however, I was intrigued enough to check sc_veral excavation reports of fourth-, fifth-, and sixth-millennimn sites and saw the possibility that tokens might have been used, with no discontinuity, between 8ooo and 3000 B.C. Therestwashard work. My tirst publications on tokens and their relation to writing date from 1974 to 1978,49 those on tokens and concrete counting from 1983,t0 1986.50

of the first incised .'>igtl.', the two recording w.·. tical importance or I I \l' 1e invention of abstr.lLI ; of the puzzle snap])L'Ll , I pulled from my lilc.·; gan collecting token'>. I lay cones, spheres, .lilt! l instinctively disrnis.'>nl ; to do \Vith the tokctlS ll, the calculi from Su . . ;t re loose; moreover, l"lw ext day, however, I \\';l.'l :s of fourth-, fifth-, and okens might have been ) B.C. The restlvas hard :1ation to writing <.:btc counting fron1 1983 to

The Evidence

PART ONE

CHAPTERONili

: 1/IMtttfacture of small objects modeled in clay and hardened with fire was a artiat.lar,lv important activity at Tell Aswad, especially in level II, in the first ''"""''~·seventh millennium . ... These were . .. artifacts ofgeometric shapes, aS balls, disks, and small cups. -HENRI DE CONTENSON'
Wl'UN TOKENS WERE INVENTED, they were great novelties. They were

the first clay objects of the Near East and the first to be fired into :Cc>ran1ic. Their shapes also were revolutionary since, as Cyril Smith has tlC>int:ed out, they first exploited, systematically, all the basic geometric fm·tm:.' This first chapter deals with the physical aspect of the tokens, the types and subtypes, the evolution from ''plaid' to "complex" tokens, the materials of which these artifacts were made, and the technique used for their manufacture.
TYPES AND SUBTYPES

Tokens are small clay objects, modeled into the following sixteen main types: (I) cones, (2) spheres, (3) disks, (4) cylinders, (5) tetrahedrons, ( 6) ovoids, (7) quadrangles, (8) triangles, (9) biconoids, (ro) paraboloids, (n) bent coils, (I2) ovals/rhomboids, (IJ) vessels, (I4) tools, (I5) anin1als, and (I6) miscellaneous. (See the charts in Part Three below.) The tokens are further classified into subtypes according to intentional variations in size or the addition of markings. Cones, spheres, clisks, and tetriliedrons, for example, are consistently represented in two sizes, ''small" and "large." Spheres also occur in fractions such as hemispheres and three-quarter spheres. The markings consist of incised lines, notches, punches, pinched appenclices, or applique pellets. Because they were handmade, the size of the tokens varies from artifact to artifact and from site to site. The usual dimension ranges from r to 3 em across. The "large" subtypes of cones, spheres, disks, and tetrahedrons measure about 3~ 5 em.
EVOLUTION FROM PLAIN TO COMPLEX

During the first four thousand years tokens were "plain" (fig. J). The forms consisted mainly of geometric shapes, such as cones, spheres, flat and len-

Fig. 4. Token assemblage illustrating major types of tokens, Uruk, Iraq. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

20

THE

EVIDENCE

crisp edges, but some arc sloppily done, exhibiting an uneven contour. The stone tokens, which required far greater skill to manufacture and a timeconsmning polishing process, usually show excellent craftsnunship. Tokens of the Neolithic period were not thoroughly baked and often reveal a black core. Scanning electron microscopy and differential thermal analysis confirmed that the firing temperature of the prehistoric tokens varied between 500° and 800° C. The fourth-millennium B.C. cotmters, on the other hand, are usually bufi:pink throughout their thiclmess, showing a perfect control ofthe firing process.
THE TOKEN COLLECTION UNDER STUDY

Fig. 5. Complex tokens, Susa, Iran. Courtesy Mus8e du Louvre, 08partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

This study is based on 8,162 tokens consisting of 3,354 spheres, 1,457 cones, 1,095 disks, 8o6 cylinders, 278 quadrangles, 233 triangles, 220 tetrahedrons, 204 ovoids, 129 animals, 85 paraboloids, Sr vessels, 6o bent coils, 51 biconoids, 45 ovals, 33 miscellaneous, and 3I tools. The assemblage, which is fially published in Before Writing, Volume II: A Catalog ofNear Eastern Tokens, has been compiled by studying the collections in the museums where they were stored or from site reports and, ideally, by combining the two sources. The catalog suggests two observations. First, the number of tokens differs greatly from site to site. Compare, for example, tl1e largest assemblages- Jarmo 2,022, Uruk 812, Susa 783, Ganj Dareh Tepe 575, Tepe Gawra 485, Tell Ramad 380, and Tell Aswad 320- with some of tl1e smallest collections- Matarrili I, Tell Songor I, Ubaid I, and Tell Hassuna 3. Second, small token assemblages are more frequent than large ones, with as many as tl1irty collections having fewer than ten tokens. The number of counters per site does not seem to reflect particular

Fig. 6. Tokens with punctated markings, Susa, Iran. Courtesy Musee du Louvre, D8partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

uneven contour. The nufacn1re and a tiinecraftsmanship. ghly baked and often 1d differential thermal prehistoric tokens var1 B.c. counters, on the thickness, showing a
1

3. DISKS
Incised Lines

'·-·--·-·-··--··

Parallel Lines

Parallel Lines +Strokes

1(D2(I[D2@D21JID2®2·2· 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 (]]) QED@ 00800 36 37 37A 38 39 40 41 42 42A
-

.

4- spheres, 1,4-57 cones,

tetrahedrons, o bent coils, 51 biconmblage, which is fully Car Eastern Tokens, has eums where they were ~the two sources. munber of tokens dif· le, the largest ass em· Tepe 575, Tepe Gawra 1e of the smallest col· II Hassuna 3. Second, ;e ones, with as many

~les, 220

~@e ~@~~@®

··--

4~ 4~4. CYLINDERS
Incised Lines

4. 4. 48~ 490 500 16
(~

15

E
6. OVOIDS
Circular Incised Lines

t:j

~:9

17

~
O_i

~~:}

1

to reflect particnlar

Vertical Lines

140 15@ 16i 17i 18. 19® 20® 21e 22@ .. 0 0 © @ 8 9
· . ··

(])C) (j])E8
7. QUADRANGLES
Strokes

5w

6m

78=~

Chart 1. Token series. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

Horizontal Lines

10

~
1 5 8 9

11

8. TRIANGLES
Strokes

~
6 7 10

Incised Lines

2

vvv
11 12 15 16 19 20

C7G0V
13

VV\cJCO
14 18

Parallel Lines

23

V~\QY\znY Q:zrssY \fJ]JSY 'QJmjY ~ ~
21 22 24 25 26

17

~~~~
Incised Base

41

V~,

9. BICONOIDS
Incised Lines

6~

77

8$

9~

Chart 1. (continued)

PARABOLOIDS
1 4 5 6 6A 68

OOOQ~O
Circular Line 12 13 14 15

- - -

Oiffitlil
11. BENT COILS
Straight Section+
Punctations

12. RHOMBOIDS
22

rw

13. VESSELS
Pitchers

Jars

Chart 1. (continued)

Tllll

h\llhm,lnH

firl\!!iit)~!ll10lllk Hlt'!fli"#

bllt, tlll'hll!\ tl\1\ ll!dll1k1il di llicultics in excavating the

Hlilli.'!'h\1 \llld in ~m!lpi!llif,l till' ow\ log. Tllcl'c is no indication, for example,

thi\1' life· (\!' )itl'l'HO, which produced liOllW two thousand tokens, was much difii!l'clli' lhm1 rhat of orhcr Nwlirhic sites such as Hasswu, which yielded only three. 'l'hc large discrepancy between the number of tokens at each site has to do with the type of expedition. Excavations depend greatly upon
luck: one trench may produce nmncrous artifacts~ whereas the next is stcr~

ile. Consequently, short-term salvage projects limited to small excavated
surfaces are more vulnerable to chance than is full-scale horizontal exposure

in extensive fieldwork, as at Jarmo. This probably explains why Tell Abada, for example, produced an assemblage of fifty tokens, 4 whereas the neighboring Tell Oueili yielded fewer tl1an five tokens. Methods of excavation are also responsible for the uneven nwnbers. Tokens pose a challenge to the best excavators because of their size and color. Being small and blending in with the fill, they are particularly difficult to spot. Expeditions such as Jarmo and Ganj Dareh, where the dirt was systematically sifted, had a better chance of salvaging tokens from the excavation dwnps than those where tl1is did not occur. At all sites, the plain cylinders- which are not much bigger tl1an a grain of wheat- are probably among those which were most missed. It is very possible that spheres were indeed the most popular token shape; on tl1e other hand, they were often taken for marbles and tl1erefore had the best chance to be entered in site reports under the rubric "games." In fact, the lack of docwnentation was the major problem in compiling the token catalog. Often, the tokens are not yet published and tlms the collections available represent only a portion of me actual assemblages. This is the case, for instance, for Chagha Mish and Ganj Dareh Tepe. In early
excavations~

moreover, tokens were glossed over in the site reports. In some

cases, me lack of publication could be compensated for by studying me material stored in museums, but more often this could not be done. For example, me following statement in the Hassuna report- "pellets ... were found in considerable quantities in every level of the main sounding at Hassuna" 5 - suggests that, in fact, many tokens were collected at the site. However, there is no trace of any such artifact at the Iraq Museum, where the Hasstma material is stored, except for one clay cone and two stone spheres.

The remainder of the "considerable qnantities" of pellets can no longer be accurately docwnented. The three tokens reported for Hassw1a in the catalog are not a representative sample of the original collection. Hassuna is not the only example where the nwnber of tokens excavated does not correspond to the collections at hand. In fact, this state of affairs
is prevalent. Jemdet Nasr, for instance, is another site where, according to the report, cones were found "in great number"; yet only seven specimens are documented. 6 According toM. E. L. Mallowan, cones "were common"

at Arpachiyal1, but only twenty-four can be traced in me reserves of me British Musewn and the Iraq Musewn in Baghdad? The reports also often
communicate incorrect perceptions. For example, because the stone tokens

had more aesthetic appeal than their more modest clay counterparts, they

i~cu~ties in excavating the o mdiCation, for example, Jusa.nd tokens, was nmch s Hassuna, which yielded nber of tokens at each site ms depend greatly upon 1 whereas the next is sternited to small excavated scale horizontal exposure 'xplains why Tell Abada, ::ns, 4 whereas the neighMethods of excavation IS pose a challenge to the 1 g small and blending in >t. Expeditions such as ically sifted, had a better Imps than those where -which are not much those which were most he most popular token marbles and therefore ler the rubric "games." problem in compiling lblished and thus tile tual assemblages. This Dareh Tepe. In early ::: Slte reports. In some I for by studying the ild not be done. For 1ft- ''pellets ... were ain sounding at Has:ted at tl1e site. HowMuseum, where the d two stone spheres. ots can no longer be Hassuna in the cata:tion.

, were often given more attention in the publications, sometimes suggesting Hwt stone specimens were n1ore numerous than the clay ones when the t't:Vcrse was true. At Hasstma, for instance, the only specimens illustrated In the report are two stone spheres. 8 The same thing happens at the site of Amuq and especially at Tepe Gawra, where the stone tokens were published but tl1ree hundred clay specimens were dismissed.' The Ubaid report includes information on a single token, a paraboloid, described as "the tongue of an animal sculph1re." 10 In this case, it is likely that the paraboloid was deen1cd important enough to be published because its form seemed unusual and interesting, while the more inconspicuous types were ignored. As a result, Ubaid appears, probably erroneously, as a w1ique assemblage yielding a complex token but no plain ones. The large number of tokens collected at Jarmo can be explained in several ways. First, Jarmo was a long-term, extensive excavation where the dirt was systematically sifted. Perhaps more important, a member of the team, Vivian L. Broman, was studying clay artifacts. It is likely that her interest generated among the workers the necessary vigilance for finding the objects and keeping them. Furthermore, Broman wrote up her results in her thesis, malting the material available." Her study remains rmique to this day in presenting a detailed report of a token assemblage. It is obvious that, without Broman's work, we today would know as much- or, rather, as littleabout the Jarmo tokens as we do about other Neolithic token assemblages, such as that ofHassrma. The two thousand tokens excavated at Jarmo give us a tantalizing idea of the number of tokens that could be expected at each site. Jarmo was no more and no less tl1an an average farming community in the seventh and sixth millennia B.C. Its token collection should be considered, therefore, as an average Neolithic assemblage. By contrast, the 3 tokens from Hasstma and even the 812 tokens ofUruk, 783 from Susa, and 485 from Tepe Gawra are only a pale reflection of the collections that might have been recovered. The token assemblages now available give at best precarious and at worst unreliable information on the nwnber of tokens at each site and on the frequency of token types. On the other hand, the same data plotted on a map of the Near East create an awesome picture of the vast geographic expanse where the system of reckoning was used (map r).

WHAT ARE

25

TOKENS?

of tokens excavated , this state of affairs vhere, according to Jy seven specimens es "were cormnon" the reserves of the : reports also often ;;e the stone tokens counterparts, they

;I

26

21 33

87 107 47 103

55 76 91 51 73 56
7 34

29

28
36

58
49

84

71 65
88 91:1

27

85 78

83

75

3

0 ~====================~400km
Bold = plain tokens only Italic =plain and complex tokens

2 3 4
5
6

7 8
9

Abdul Hosein Abu Hureira Ain Ghazal AliKosh Amuq An au Arpachiyah Bam pur Beidha

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

Beisamoun Beldibi Belt Cave Can Hasan C,::ayOnii Tepesi Chagar Bazar Chagha Sefid Chcikh Hassan Choga Mami

19 Chogha Bonut Cho,.trha Mirh 21 Dalma Tepe 22 Deb Luran 23 Eridu 24 Para 25 Ganj Dareh 26 Geoy Tepe 27 Ghoraife
20

28 Gird Ali Agha 29 Gird Banahilk 30 Gritille
31

32 33 34 35 36

Habuba Kabira Hadidi Hajji Firuz Hassuna Jaffacabad
J~o

37 38 39 40 41 42 43
44

Jebr!Amda
Jeitun

46

Larsa
Maghzaliyah Malyan Matarrah Megiddo M'lefaat Moussia11 Munhata Mureybet

Jemdet Nasr Jericho Khafajc Kish KS 34
[(5 54

45 KS 76

47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54

Map 1. Distribution of

tokens.

Distribution of Tokens

38
6

s

26

21 33
91

95

'6

5l

29 28 36
58 7l 65

108

7

49

84

99

22

62

48

70

69

92 100 %

8

=

400 km

Larsa Maghzaliyah Malyan Matarrah Megiddo M'Iefaat 52 Moussim1 53 Munhata 54 Mureybet

46

47 48 49 50 51

55 Nemrik 56 Nineveh
57 58

59 60 61 62 63

Nippur Nuzi Rasa! Amiya Ras Shamra Seh Gabi Shahdad Sharafabad

64 65 66 67
68

69 70
7l

72

Shahr-i Sokhta Siahbid Sippar Suberde Sma Tal-i-Iblis Tall+Bakun Tell Abada TcllAgrab

73 74 75 76 77 78 79

Tell Aphek Tell Asmar Tell Aswad Tell Billa Tell Brak Tell es-Sawwan Tell Halaf 80 Tell Kanuas 81 Tell Oueili

82 83 84 85
86

87 88 89 90

Tell Ramad Tell Raschid Tell Songor Tell Yelkhi Tello Telul eth Thalathat TepeA.siab Tepe Bouhallan Tepe Farukhabad

91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99

Tepe Gawra Tepe Gaz Tavila Tepe Giyan Tepe Guran Tepe Hissar Tepe Muradabad Tepe Sabz Tepe Sarah Tepc Sialk

100 Tepe Yahya 101 Tula'i
102

Ubaid

103 Umm Dabaghiyah 104 Uqair 105 u,
106

Uruk

107 Yarim Tepe 108 Zagheh

Map 1. (continued)

Where Tokens Were Handled and Who Used Them

CHAPTER TWO

There is one fact which can be established: the only phenomena which, always and in all parts of the world, seems to be linked with the appearance ofwriting ... is the establishment of hierarchical societies; consisting of masters and slaves; and where one part ofthe population is made to work for the other part.
-CLAUDE LEVI -STRAUSS l

THIS CHAPTER IS DEVOTED to recounting the contexts in which tokens

have been recovered. I describe the types of settlements and stnKtures where tokens were found and the artifacts with which they were associated. Finally, I focus on the rare tokens discovered in funerary contexts because these may yield important information concerning the status of the individuals with whom they were buried.
TYPES OF SETTLEMENTS

The five sites where tokens first appeared armmd 8ooo B.C.- Tepe Asiab and Ganj Dareh E in Iran 2 and Tell Aswad, Tell Mureybet, and Cheikh Hassan in Syria 3 -were remarkably similar. All were small open-air compounds built with characteristic round huts. Among them, the two Iranian settlements were semipermanent, but Tell Mureybet, Cheikh Hassan, and Tell Aswad were fully sedentary, agricultural communities. During the seventh to fourth millem1ia B.C., tokens spread to a great diversity of habitats. In Iran, Belt Cave (inhabited during the Neolithic period) and Tula\ an encampment of nomadic herders, both yield clay counters. 4 The majority of plain tokens, however, come from sedentary villages of rectangular houses, such as Jarmo in Iraq. On the other hand, cmnplex tokens are associated with the ruins of cities having monwnental public architecture. This is the case for Uruk, in Iraq, Susa, in Iran, and Habuba Kabira, in Syria.
DISTRIBUTION WITHIN SETTLEMENTS

In most of the sites where the context of tokens was recorded, the counters were recovered partly within and partly ontside buildings. At Tell Aswad, as at other sites, a good 1nany tokens were located in vacant lots, mixed with animal bones and other debris, in what appear to be trash deposits. 5 At Sharafabad in tl1e fourth millenniwn B.c., tokens were retrieved from an

30

THE EVIDENCE

ancient garbage pit, where it could be determined that the counters were most often associated with early summer deposits but were rarer in layers corresponding to winter trash. Henry T. Wright noted that tokens were apparently discarded after the harvest, the traditional season for feasts. 6 Both in Utuk and in Susa tokens were found in close proximity to the main temples. In Utuk, counters were spotted all over the tell) but 719 examples (88.5%) were excavated in the sacred precinct of Eanna, 43 (5.3%) came from the Ann Ziggurat, and so (6.2%) were from the city's private quarters. It also seems significant that at Susa aln1ost every single trench opened south of the main temple generated tokens, but only a few were recovered in the northern part of the same tell of the Acropolis and in the next tell of the Ville Royale. In both cities, tokens were found in open spaces. At Ea1ma, tokens were scattered about on the grotmds of the Stone Cone Temple? and in the Great Courtyard. 8 The distribution of tokens within settlements suggests two important facts. First, in cities, tokens are more frequent in official rather than secular ,quarters. Second, the discovery of tokens among refuse in vacant lots sug1i1gests that the cotmters were discarded as soon as their function had been '\fulfilled. In other words, they were used primarily for record keeping rather ~an for reckoning. In this regard, the tokens are similar to the archaic tablets of Uruk, also consistently found in dumps, and remind us of the custom that continued in historic tllnes of routinely discarding economic tablets.'

STRUCTURES
The structures which yielded tokens fall into two categories: domestic and public. At Ali Kosh, a few tokens were retrieved from a domestic setting, where they were associated with flint tools and with ground stone mortars a11d pestles. 10 In this case, the tokens give the llnpression of having been discarded when the house was no longer in use, rather than being in situ. The same is true at Seh Gabi, where some tokens were scattered among ordinary houses- here next to a jar, 1 1 there in a hearth. 12 At TellesSawwai1, 13 Hajji Firuz, 14 and Gaz Tavila 15 the tokens were concentrated in storage areas. This was also the case at Ganj Dareh Tepe, where a large quantiry of tokens lay among cubicles situated below the houses. 16 The most interesting finding at Hajji Firuz consisted of a cluster of six cones located in a structure showing no trace of domestic activities, such as cooking or flint chipping. 17 The building also differed from the remaining houses in other ways. First, it was s1naller, consisting of a single room instead of the normal two-room unit. Second, unusual features, such as a low platform and two posts had been erected inside. 18 The structure which yielded most tokens at Hajji Firuz apparently served a special, albeit enigmatic, fi.mction. At Tell Abada, the majority of the tokens, a total of forry artifacts, sometimes kept in vessels, were recovered in Building A, the largest building excavated in the settlement. The size of the building

hi I tb

c~

I

1\! si

'

,j

that the counters \Vl'l'(! JUt \vere rarer in ];l)'t'fN oted that tokens wet'(.i l season for feasts. close proxin1ity to till} ,rer the tell, but 710 l'X·' ct of Eanna, 43 (5.3'X.) ''rom the city's 1 · ~ JSt every single tn:1 , but only a few e Acropolis and in the
h

'v/12118

WHERE 31 TOKENS WERE HANDLED AND "WHO USED THEM

W 2i&G7

Fig. 7. Cache of tokens found in a hearth, Uruk {OaXV 4/5}, Iraq. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

and ren1ind us of · discarding eccmomit presence of infant burials suggested to the excavators "a religious Uk:ance." 19 Uruk, tokens were related to some of the most spectacnlar buildings V, such as the Stone Cone Temple and the Limestone Temple, trenches laid in the city yielded exceedingly few counters. A cache tW<!ntv-tiVe tokens was recovered in situ in the impressive complex of F, G, and H ofEanna (fig. 7). These stmctures, erected at right · arotmd a courtyard, were typical of the monumental architecture at They were bnilt according to the nsual plan, which consisted of a central hall flanked by smaller rooms, and their facades were decorated niches. The sixty-one spheres, seven large spheres, three tetrahedrons, cones, and two cylinders lay on the floor of a room extending to the ·I of Building H, in a large circular hearth with a long appendix of the ttmenstiel type." It is puzzling that tokens were located in fireplaces on occasions, at Seh Gabi and Uruk. It might be hypothesized that they · intentionally placed in the hearth in order to be baked. On the other it is also possible and perhaps more likely that they were brushed into ashes with other trash in order to be discarded. At Susa, tokens also belonged to the temple precinct, where they were ustcrc:ct in a zone devoted to workshops and warehouses. For example, uenem indicates that envelopes holding tokens were excavated in a area. 21 The stnKtures, made of clay and involving decorations made large cones, were divided into small compartments. One of these

dmnestic a domestic settingj h ground stone impression of se, rather than
111

~gories:

were concentrated Tepe, where a the houses. 16 ted of a cluster of · .

ting of a single mal features, such · side. 18 The struct:ur'' erved a special, the tokens, a total vered in Building A, : size of the building

32

THE

houses was still filled with long-spouted jars that held a black, powdery
substance. Seven of the largest and most itnposing houses of Habuba Kabira

EVIDENCE

yielded tokens. These buildings stood out because oftheir typical Sumerian
floor plan and central courtyards. Most of these buildings produced other bureaucratic n1aterials such as seals and sealings, oblong bullae, envelopes, and ll11pressed tablets. Otherwise, flint tools, pottery, and spindle whorls seem to indicate domestic concerns. It seen1s particularly significant that

the southern city gate, which led to the temple, produced not only fifteen tokens but a cylinder seal and nw11erous oblong bullae. In sun1, tokens were often located ll1 storage facilities and warehouses. More important, there is evidence that as early as the sixth millenniun1 B.c. tokens also occur in nondmnestic architecnrre. These public buildings can take the form, over time, of a "temple" as at Untie or of a"s!rY gate as at ·.: :/~_*'-:!' Habuba Kabira.
TOKEN CLUSTERS

Tokens are frequently fonnd in groups varying from two to about one htmdred. At Gaz Tavila, thirty-five cones and one sphere were nestled togemer in the corner of a storeroom. 22 Ganj Dareh Tepe also produced many small hoards of two to thirty-seven tokens of mixed types, tightly packed together in storage cubicles. Tell Abada yielded eleven clusters of four to sixteen tokens. 23 Finally, Urnl< produced the cache of seventy-five tokens composed of spheres, large spheres, cones, tetrahedrons, and cylinders described above. Moreover, there can be little doubt that some of tl1e 155 tokens from level VI of Eanna were also clustered together. The groups of tokens recovered in the buildings ofHabuba Kabira were remarkably small. The house which yielded tl1e largest number produced twenty-one, divided into five rooms in clusters of at most nine tokens. Furthermore, except for House 2, Which held only incised ovoids, the assemblages were always composed of several types of connters. In sum, me evidence indicates mat me aCCOW1tS kept witl1 tokens dealt generally wim ramer small quantities of different kinds of commodities.
CONTAINERS HOLDING TOKENS

At Tell Abada, some tokens were held in pottery bowls or jars and omers were found on the floor. 24 In most other sites, the tokens were located on tl1e floor of tl1e buildings or storage cubicles. Because mey were clustered tightly togemer it is likely that mey had been held in a container which disintegrated in time, leaving no trace. Baskets, wooden boxes, Ieamer or textile pouches are among me possible types of receptacles which might have been used. In texts from me Third Dynasty ofUr, ca. 2000 B.C., mere is perhaps a reference to Ieamer bags being used to hold tokens. Marcel

eld a black, powdery

Sigrist has noted a tablet referring to "1492 fat oxen in the leather bag" which, according to Sigrist, can be understood as "counters representing
I492 oxen kept in archive in a leather bag." 25

s of Habuba Kabira their typical Sun1erian dings produced other

WHER.E 33 TOKENS WERE HANDLED AND WHO USED THEM

)ng bullae, envelopes,

ASSOCIATED ASSEMBLAGES

y, and spindle whorls ularly significant that luced not only fifteen

In the eighth millenniun1 B.C. the first tokens coincide with food production. The fact that counting and accotmting were related to agriculture is

Le.

ities and warehouses.
sixth millennium B.C.

' public buildings can )r of a ciry gate as at

>f:J/,

particularly well illustrated at Mureybet. Here, the first occurrence of tokens (in level III) corresponded with a guannun jump in the quantity of cereal pollen. This implies the cultivation of grain in fields, whereas wild grains were still being gathered in the previous levels (II and I), when tokens were not yet in use. Also, Mureybet III initiated large rectangular silos to store cereals."' Finally, the settlement expanded rapidly, reflecting a
population increase. 27 Subsistence also relied upon grain consumption at

Ganj Dareh Tepe, Tepe Asiab, Tell Aswad, and Cheikh Hassan. On the other hand, none of these five sites, except perhaps Tepe Asiab,28 provided
any osteological evidence for domestication of animals. From the seventh

wo to about one hunwere nestled together

produced many small :s, tighrly packed ton clusters of four to >f sevenry-five tokens ms, and cylinders deat some of the 155 toher. "Habuba Kabira were :st number produced 1ost nine tokens. Fur:::d ovoids, the assem:mnters. In sum, the s dealt generally with

to the early fourtl1 millennium B.c., tokens continued to be typical of agricultural communities. Tokens were apparenrly not related to trade in general or to the obsidian trade in particular. There was no obsidian at Ganj Dareh Tepe, which produced many tokens. Mureybet I and II worked the
prized volcanic glass before tokens cJlne into existence. In the fourtl1 millenniwn B.c. the five sites which produced the largest

assemblages of complex tokens- Uruk and Tello in Iraq, Susa and Chogha Mish in Iran, and Habuba Kabira-Tell Ka1mas in Syria- have striltingly similar assemblages. Altl1ough the cities were separated by several hlmdred
miles, they shared the same characteristic monmnental architecture, deco-

rated with niches and clay cone mosaics." The assemblages also yielded
identical pottery vessels in the same typical shapes and decorations, such as

:res.

;vls or jars and others kens were located on e they were clustered in a container which

four-lugged jars with painted and incised motifs. 30 Each of the sites held, in particular, a great nwnber of crudely manufactured beveled-rim bowls which may have served as measures for the distribution offood rations." The seals and sealings of the five cities were alike, bearing similar motifs. They featured the bearded figure of the Mesopotamian priest-king, the socalled En, in his rypical attire consisting of a long robe in a nerlike fabric and a rmmd headdress." Finally, all five sites except Tello yielded not only envelopes holding tokens but impressed tablets as well. The various features which occur with consistency in the assemblages of sites yielding complex
tokens- the priest-king, public monumental architecture, measures, seals, and complex tokens- represent the elements of an elaborate bureaucracy.

den boxes, leather or
2000 B.c.,

:ptacles which might
there

r, ca.

hold tokens. Marcel

They indicate the presence of a powerful economic institution headed by an En, who acted in public buildings decorated with mosaics and relied upon a control of goods involving seals, beveled-rim bowls, and complex tokens.

34

THE EVIDENCE

It is significant that the architecture decorated with cone mosaics, the beveled-rim bowls, the cylinder seals, and the motif of the En are of Mesopotamian origin but were foreign in Iran and Syria. In fact, they were hallmark features of the precinct of Eanna at Uruk. From this perspective, it may be particularly significant that the large collection of tokens in level VI was associated with the piles of clay cone mosaics nurking the first evidence for decorated public buildings at Eatma. 33 Whereas agriculture is the major comtnon denominator between sites yielding plain tokens, the cities that produced complex tokens shared the same bureaucracy, which had special ties with South Mesopotamia.
TOKENS AS FUNERARY OFFERINGS

On rare occasions, counters were associated with funerary deposits. These burials may provide information on the individuals who were utilizing tokens.

The Sites

I

From the sixth to the fourth millennia B.c., tokens were sometimes laid in burials. Among the five sites which furnished tokens in a funerary context, Tell es-Sawwan, Arpachiyah, and Tepe Gawra are located in northern Mesopotamia; 34 Tepe Guran and Hajji Firuz are in Iran. 35 The custom was practiced, therefore, in a widespread geographic area and cannot be considered a regional development.

The Burials

At each of the five sites, the munber of sepulnrres provided with tokens is very small. Ouly four out of some one hundred thirty burials excavated in Tell es-Sawwan I yielded counters. There was a single case of tokens laid as grave gifts among, respectively, the fourteen interments of Hajji Firuz, the fifty Ubaid graves of Arpachiyah, the thirty graves of Tepe Gawra XVII, and the five graves ofTcpe Gawra XL Finally, only four out of eighty tombs ofTepe Gawra X held COlmters. The total munber of burials including tokens, then, amounts to no more than a dozen. The interments provided with counters were of several types. At Hajji Firuz, tokens were mixed with the disarticulated bones of a multiple burial; 36 at Tell es-Sawwan, Arpachiyah, and Tepe Gawra XVII and XI, tokens were part of simple graves consisting of a shallow pit dug in the earth." Finally, in Tepe Gawra X, tokens were laid in elaborate tombs involving a brick or stone enclosure. 38 The various sepultures furnished with tokens belonged to adult males or children, except in the case of Hajji Firuz, where one of the four individuals of the ossuary may have been a young female. 39 It is striking that nearly all

ith cone mosaics, the ,f the En are of Meson fact, they were hallm this perspective, it 1 of tokens in level VI Icing the first evidence ;riculn1re is the major :okcns, the cities that cy, which had special

erary deposits. These : who were utilizing

these sepuln1res yielding tokens show some unusual features. A first group of burials is characterized by being lavishly furnished. Among them, the graves of Tell es-Sawwan had quantities of alabaster vessels and, in tvvo cases, ornaments of either dentalia shell or carnelian. 40 At Tepe Gawra, the child grave in stran1m XI was unique in holding gold ornaments. 41 In level X of Tepe Gawra, Tombs roz, no, and II4- were among the richest sepultures of the site. They included obsidian, serpentine, or electrum vessels, gold ornaments in the form of studs, beads, or rosettes, stone maceheads, and lapis lazuli seals. 42 A second group of burials was associated with uncommon architectural features. For example, at Hajji Fimz, the human bones deposited with tokens were in the small, unusual building described above. 43 The second example, Tomb I07 at Tepe Gawra, was the sepulture of an adult male who was unique in having a shrine erected upon his re1nains. 44 In this case, the burial gifts amounted to six spheres- and nothing else (fig. 8). Finally, the most puzzling burial, the grave ofTepe Gawra XVII, belonged to an individual with both legs amputated below the knee. 45 The burial at Arpachiyah

WHERE 35 TOKENS WERE Hfu'JDLED AND WHO USED THEM

Fig. 8. Details of selected tomb burials (Tombs 102,107,110,

114}. Reproduced from Arthur J. Tobler,

Excavations at Tepe

Gawra, vol. 2, University
Museum Monographs (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1950}, pl. XXVII; courtesy University

sometimes laid in n a funerary context, ~din northern Meso'he custom was prac:annat be considered

~re

Museum, University

of Pennsylvania.

TOMB 102

TOMB 107

vided with tokens is burials excavated in :ase of tokens laid as ts of Hajji Firuz, the 'Tepe Gawra XVII, out of eighty tombs >urials inclucling to-

TOMB 114

TOMB 110

reral types. At Hajji ones of a multiple n XVII and XI, tolow pit dug in the elaborate tombs in-

·

. ..

,'

;ed to adult males or the four inclividuals ·i!cing that nearly all

A· BEADS B- STONE VESSELS C · STONE SPHERES, ETC 0- MACE HEADS E · OBSIDIAN BLADES F · WHETSTONE G · GOLD ORNAMENTS

TEPE GAWRA
DETAILS OF SELECTED TOMB BURIALS
SCALE I"

~~~----~======~· MtlRE5

H·GOLD ROSETTES J · WOLFS HEAD K- COMBS AND HAIR PINS l · SPATULAS M· SEALS N · POTTERY VESSELS

36

THE EVIDENCE

is the only one which yields tokens but has no other particularly striking fean1res.
The Tokens

Among the many types and subtypes of tokens, four only were recovered in sepuln1res: cones, spheres, three-quarter spheres, and miniature vessels. Among these, spheres were by far most frequently used, occurring in ten of the fourteen burials with a total number of forty-nine specimens. The fortyfour cones were distributed J.Inong only three sepultures, and three-quarter spheres and vessels were present in a single grave. As a mle, only one kind of token was usually represented in each burial. For example, three graves of Tell es-Sawwan contained spheres, but the fourth grave held a cone; 40 Tombs 107 and no of Tepe Gawra held only spheres, but the grave in level XVII held cones." Tomb 102 ofTepe Gawra, however, yielded both spheres and cones.48 Tokens laid in burials were identical in shape to those found in settlements. The only difference between tokens used as funerary offerings and those used in daily life is that the former were often made of stone instead of clay. Nine of the fourteen sepnltures were provided with stone tokens, for a total of sixty-six stone specimens against forty-one made of clay. The stone examples were usually done witl1 great care and show superb workmanship. The spheres, for example, are perfectly rmmd. There is one case at Tepe Gawra, however, when spherical colmters- referred to as ''pebbles" in the report-were left rough. 49 In another instance, six chips of red jasper were seemingly intended to be made into counters, but were never finished. 50 It is possible that tl1e color of stone selected for the manufacture of tokens was meaningful: all spheres were white with the exception of two sets of red spheres (or "pebbles") 51 and a single black specimen. 52 The munber of tokens included in each sepulture varied from a minimum of one sphere at Arpachiyal1 to a maximtun of thirty-four cones in Tepe Gawra XVII. Sets of six spheres ("pebbles") which reoccur in three out of four tombs ofTepe Gawra X, suggest that this number may have had a symbolic significance. The ritual of depositing in burials tokens of special types, material, color and, in particular, number is especially significant, since it lasted for three millennia in several regions of the Near East. Notably, as will be discussed in Chapter 6 below, this ritual gives a valuable insight into the important role of the tokens as status symbols. The fact tl1at tokens occur only in rare occasions in a funerary setting, and only in graves of prestigious individuals, points to their economic significance. It implies that the tokens were a means of controlling goods in the hands of powerful people.
A FAINT SKETCH of the places

and people associated witl1 the use of tokens begins to emerge. Plain tokens began to be used in open-air compounds where subsistence was based on cultivating or, at least, hoarding grain;

r particularly striking

only were recovered nd minian1re vessels. d, occurring in ten of :pecimens. The forty·cs, and three-quarter

;ented in each burial. 1ed spheres, but the :pe Gawra held only J roz ofTepe Gawra,

cmnplex tokens were the invention of the South Mesopotamian temples. The plain specimens remained a familiar fean1re in agricultural communities until the end of the system, whereas the complex ones occur only in administrative centers. Starting in the fifth millennium, tokens arc consistently found in public buildings and warehouses. When they arc in a domestic setting, the counters tend to be clustered in storage areas. The hoards of tokens found in situ range usually fron1 twelve to seventy-five artifacts, showing that both in private and public buildings the counters were never kept in large quantities. They nuy have been stored in leather pouches until the invention of the cylinder seal ushered in the invention of clay envelopes and bullae. Tokens were apparently not reused but were disposed of once the transaction they represented was concluded. There is even some evidence that the counters were discarded after the harvest. Tokens, together with other status syn1bols, were sometimes included in the burials of prestigious individuals, suggesting that they were used by members of the elite.

WHERE 37 TOKENS WERE HANDLED AND WHO USED THEM

tose fom1d in settlenerary offerings and ade of stone instead i with stone tokens, te made of clay. The show superb workd. There is one case ~rred to as "pebbles" six chips of red jasbut were never finthe manufacrure of 1e exception of two

:::cirnen. 52 The numa 1ninimum of one nes in Tepe Gawra 1 three out of four tave had a symbolic

pes, material, color ' it lasted for three lS will be discussed into the important ; occur only in rare ~restigious individat the tokens were eople.

h the use of tokens ton -air compotmds t, hoarding grain;

Strings of Tokens and Envelopes

CHAPTER THREE

When shaking . .. [the clay balls] . .. close to the ear, one can hear the noise ofthe small objects knocking against one another inside. Specimens, broken in the course ofthe excavations, showed that they contained small terra-cotta artifacts ofvarious shapes:grains~ conesJ pyramids) pills 1 em in diameter. - R. DE MECQUENEM 1
IN THE EARLY FOURTH MILLENNIUM B.C. two methods were devised to store tokens in archives. The first consisted of tying perforated tokens with a string; the second, enclosing the counters in day envelopes. Both

techniques insured that groups of tokens representing one account could

be securely held together and that the transaction could be identified by sealings. Interest in these two devices would be esoteric if it were not for
their llnportance in the invention of writing.

STRINGS OF TOKENS
Perforated Tokens

Some tokens show a perforation throughout their thickness (fig. 9 ). The geographic and chronological distribution of these perforated artifacts suggests that they were not a general phenmnenon but were restricted to cmn-

plex token assemblages. The geographic distribution of perforated tokens is close to that of complex tokens. There are no perforated specimens in Turkey or Palestine, but some are represented in particular sites in Iraq, Iran, and Syria. Perforated tokens occur occasionally in plain token collections of the early periods, but they proliferate in the fourth millennium B.C. There are, for example, II9 perforated tokens at Umk, representing 14.7 percent of the assemblage, 189 at Susa (27 percent), and n8 at Habuba Kabira (84 percent).

Solid Bullae

The perforations apparently allowed a string or tl1ong to hold tl1e tokens of a particular transaction togetl1er. If tl1is idea is correct, we may expect that botl1 ends of the string were tied together and secured by sealings identifying tl1e account and preventing any tampering. A category of small bullae,

40

THE EVIDENCE

bearing sealings, could have served this purpose (figs. ro and TI ). The bullae are made of clay. They arc solid, modeled in an oblong or biconoid shape, measure about 7 em in length and 5 cn1 in diarneter. The bullae are covered with sealings and shmv, at both ends, the trace of the strings to \Vhich they \vcrc attached. Bullae arc generally viewed as tags tied onto bales ofn1erchandise. 1 Their interpretation as a device for holding tokens is supported by the fact that the geographic distribution of the bullae also generally coincides with that of cmnplex tokens. At Susa, 3 Chagha Mish,4 and Habuba Kabira,s for example, complex tokens and solid bullae belong to the same horizon and in the same vicinity, although there is no reference in the reports that they were found in direct association. 6 It may be significant that the greatest

Fig. 9. Disks (some
perforated), Uruk, Iraq. Courtesy Vorderasiatisches Museum, Staatliche Museen zu Berlin.

ro and n). The bullae g or biconoid shape, he bullae are covered )trings to which they
~merchandise. 2 Their

'rted by the fact that y coiiKides with that mba Kabira, 5 for exsame horizon and in he reports that they mt that the greatest

nwnbcr of bullae comes from Habuba Kabira, the site that produced the most perforated tokens, and that none has yet been recovered at Uruk, where perfOrated tokens were few. Furthermore, as shown by the i1nprints at both extremities of the bullae, the strings they held were thin and could fit easily in the token perforations. Finally, their close resen1blance to the envelopes described below cannot be coincidental. The two kinds of objects are very similar in appearance: they arc 1nade of the san1e material, share the same size and, sometimes, arc modeled in the san1e oblong shapes. They also bear the same scalings, showing similar 1notifs, including lines of peaceful animals, lions in heraldic posture, and humans performing tasks. In some instances, in fact, an ll11pression of the same seal appears on both types of artifacts. For example, at Susa, a particular seal featuring a line of

STRINGS OF TOKENS Al'JD ENVELOPES

41

Fig. 10. Two bullae, Susa (Sb 6298 and 9279), Iran. Courtesy Musee du Louvre, D8partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

Fig. 11 . Proposed
reconstruction of a string of tokens held by a solid bulla. Drawing by Ellen Simmons.

42

THE EVIDENCE

peaceful animals and a line of felines was impressed on a solid bulla as well as on two envelopes. 7 The number of seals is also the same on solid bullae and envelopes: both have n1ostly the impression of a single seal rolled all

over their surfaces and, on occasion, two or three. In addition, a few ex-

amples of solid bullae at Susa, Habuba Kabira, Tell Brak, and Chagar Bazar
±Cature impressed markings like those borne by son1e of the envelopes, as will be described later in this chapter.s As discussed below, moreover, son1e

of the envelopes may also have involved a system of stringing tokens.
The two kinds of artifacts have two main differences, however. First, the

envelopes were hollow and the bullae were solid. Second, the envelopes
were preferred for storing plain tokens, whereas complex specimens were mostly strung. To be exact, 83.69 percent of the tokens contained in envelopes were plain and 10.57 percent were complex (5.74 percent remain un-

determined). In addition, there are more perforated tokens among complex specimens than there are among plain specimens. It should be emphasized
here, however, that there was cross-over between the two methods. Incised

ovoids, which are complex tokens, were held in envelopes from Habuba Kabira and Umk; punched cones and tetrahedrons, triangles, rectangles, paraboloids, and animals were held in envelopes from either Susa or Uruk, or from both. On the other hand, thirteen plain specimens from Uruk were perforated, as were forty-five at Habuba Kabira (including thirty-five cones) and fourteen at Susa. In sum, the envelopes and bullae are closely related in shape and function, and it is likely that they represent two alternative ways of identifying and protecting tokens to be held in archives. For reasons that we do not know, plain tokens were most often secured by envelopes and complex tokens by solid bnllac. ENVELOPES
The Artifacts

The envelopes consist of spherical or ovoid hollow clay balls measuring about 5-7 em (fig. 12). Their manufacture was simple. The cavity to hold the tokens was shaped by poking a hole into a ball of clay with the fingers, as is shown by traces of fingertips visible inside. The red color of some of the envelopes suggests that the artifacts were baked. The fact that envelopes were fired was confirmed by electron microscopy and differential thermal analysis performed on a sample from Susa 9 Like tokens, the envelopes were balced at a low temperature of about 700° C.
Geographic Distribution and Number

Five out of the eleven protoliterate sites which produced envelopes are located in Iran. These sites arc Shahdad, Tepe Yal1ya, Chagha Mish, Susa, and Farukhabad. One is in Iraq (Uruk), one in Saudi Arabia (Dharan), one

a solid bulla as well same on solid bullae single seal rolled all 1 addition, a few ex~ tk, and Chagar Bazar of the envelopes, as ow, n1oreovcr, some ·inging tokens. >,however. First, the c:ond, the envelopes )lex specimens were s contained in envepercent remain un:ens among cmnplex ould be emphasized 10 methods. Incised opes from Habuba ~iangles, rectangles, ither Susa or Uruk, cimens from Un1k nduding thirty-five

1

STRINGS OF TOKENS AND ENVELOPES

43

Fig. 12. Envelope with six incised ovoids (the full content of the

in shape and funcways of identifying

\
in Israel (Dumal1), and three in Syria (Habuba Kabira, Tell Sheikh Hassan, and Tell Qraya). The distribution of the envelopes is thus spread over a large region which stretches from Iran to the Levant and from Iraq to Saudi Arabia (map 2). The total number of envelopes now known is about
130

envelope was seven
incised ovoids), Uruk

f:N 20987.7),1raq.
Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

ms that we do not

es and complex to-

'Y balls measuring fhe cavity to hold y wid1 the fingers, I color of some of fact that envelopes ifferential thermal

specimens and

70 fragments. The majority, or around roo complete envelopes and 70 fragments, representing 85 percent of the total assemblage, come from Iran.

he envelopes were

envelopes are loJgha Mish, Susa, Jia (Dharan), one

Among the Iranian sites, Susa produced 40 complete, 15 fragmentary envelopes, and 57 fragments. 10 The assemblage of Chagha Mish is sti!ltmpublished, except for 8 complete envelopes recovered in rl1e second campaign and a hoard of more than 20 dnring the third. ii Finally, Farulthabad, Tepe Yal1ya, and Shilidad each produced r example. 12 Iraq has a total of 25 envelopes, all of which come from Uruk. 13 Syria yielded 2 at Habuba Kabira and 3 at Tell Sheilth Hassan.>< The number of envelopes excavated at Tell Qraya is undisclosed. 15 The specimen from Israel, whid1 was purchased on the antiquity market, was said to belong to a lot of 2, originating from the site of Dumili, near Hebron." The sing!e envelope from Saudi Arabia is a surface find, collected near the Dharan airport."

Distribution of Envelope;

IV

-~~~>

'

Map 2. Distribution of
envelopes.

Chronology

The envelopes were in use for at least several centuries. They began being used in the Middle Umk period, about 3700~Jsoo B.c., as shown by the Famkhabad 18 and Chagha Mish examples." They persisted until ca. 26oo B.C. at Tepe Yahya.' 0 The custom of marking the artifacts started as early as Eanna VI~V, about 3500 B.c., as seen at Habuba Kabira. 21 This date is consistent with the information provided by the excavations at Susa,
where seventeen envelopes,originated in level IS 22 and one in level I7, 23 now

equated repectively to Eanna VI and V." Consequently, we know the envelopes of Susa to be contemporaneous with those ofHabuba Kabira. It is
interesting to note that some of the envelopes of level IS were inscribed, but the example of level I7 was not. 25 The markings, therefore, were not a function of time. The discovery of the Uruk clay cases in the Stone Cone Temple

area also suggests a date as early as Eanna VI~ V.
Context

The majority of the envelopes were associated with artifacts typical of Eanna VI~IV and were connected witl1 the South Mesopotamian temple bureaucracy. At Uruk, the twenty-five envelopes were found tucked in a wall in the vicinity of the Stone Cone Temple in the temple precinct of Inanna. This suggests that tbe envelopes were part of tl1e Stone Cone Temple archives and had been discarded, togetl1er with tokens, sealings,

un of Envelopes

. They began being ;., as shown by the persisted until ca. artifacts started as uba Kabira. " This :xcavations at Susa, 1e in level 17, 23 now r, we know the enabuba Kabira. It is Nere inscribed, but ·e, were not a fimctone Cone Temple

and beveled-rim bowls, 26 once the site was abandoned and became a quarry and dumping ground. The envelopes ofSusa, like those ofUruk, came from an area close to an important temple. According to Mecquenem the area where the artit:Kts were found was occupied by buildings divided into small compartlnents, presumably temple warehouses or workshops. 27 In the more recent campaigns, seventeen envelopes with other ad1ninistrative material (including solid oblong bullae, impressed tablets, and beveled-rim bowls) came from a building smne 30 m away frmn the monmnental terrace of the ten1ple; it is highly probable that the building fulfilled some temple function." At Habuba Kabira, the two envelopes were unearthed in the largest and n1ost i111posing house of the city. It was one of several structures at the site that were laid out according to a plan familiar in South Mesopotamia but tmusualll1 Syria, with small romns organized around a central courtyard. The building produced not only the two envelopes and their contents of incised ovoids but various articles used in ach11inistration, such as seals and sealings, complex tokens, oblong solid bullae, and four impressed tablets. The Jimction of the building was certainly related in some fashion to a South Mesopotamian adn1inistration. The setting ofTepe Yahya was similar to that ofUruk, Susa, or Habuba Kabira. It too involved an administrative building, which held plain tokens, tablets, beveled-rim bowls, nose-lugged jars, seals, and sealings. 29 In this case, however, the seals and sealings were typically Elamite and the tablets bore accounts written in the Proto-Elamite script. Tepe Yal1ya shows that envelopes appeared in two settings: related either to the South Mesopotamian temple bureaucracy or the Proto-Ela1nite bureaucracy.
State of Preservation

STRINGS OF TOKENS AND ENVELOPES

45

,rtifacts typical of 'POtamian temple found tucked in e temple precinct f the Stone Cone . tokens, sealings,

The envelopes have been recovered in various states of preservation. Some eighty are still intact, keeping and hiding an unknown number of tokens. Several of the pieces fDLmd whole have been subsequently opened by various methods in order to see their contents (table r). Among tl1em, four envelopes from Susa were punctured with a knife/0 whereas the specimen from Tepe Yahya was carefully cut open at one extremity. As a resnlt, the number of envelopes whose contents are known with absolute certainty atnotmts to no more tha11 five, or a mere 3 percent of the known assemblage. Other envelopes were broken in antiquity but were still associated with their full or partial contents of tokens (table z). This is tl1e case for nineteen examples from Susa, an unknown mnnber from Chagha Mish, five in Uruk, and two in Habuba Kabira. 31 At Farnlthabad, the broken envelope was separated frmn its contents, but the mark of a tetral1edron is visible on the inner wall. 32 Finally, five sets of tokens belonged to crushed envelopes (table 3). The first group comes from Urnlc and consists of fifty-two units, 33

Table 1. Envelopes Found Complete

1
c
~ c 0
u

~

u

~ c 0

g
u

0 u

-o

j c" "' Iii0.

" -" u

i'!

-"

.
1

~ Iii- ~ ~ '0 u '0 ·o ~ ~ c ~

~

"'

-"

-"

-o c ~ u

~

.§
" -"
B

~

-o " -"

e -" "
u

~

~
e

~

b
0 0.

b

-o E -5 j c

1 .s

1
-o
TJ
~

"Eb c
u

~

· " e ·a

"Eb c

~

]"
0
.D
0.

~

..
il

·~
u

-o c " -o c

E

~ 0
E-<
7

c 2

i:b

"

:8
7

:.

Susa Sb 1927 Sb 1936 Sb 1940 Sb 4338 Tepe Yahya

3

1 1

3

2 3 3 6

00

6
00

5
1

5
3

2
1

3

TOTAL

4

2

6

1

6

3

23

the second from Chagha Mish yields sixty-one, 34 and finally, three from Susa held respectively fourteen, seven, and four tokens. 35 X-rays have been used, with unsatisfactory results, to investigate the contents of several specllnens from Chagha Mish, 36 Susa, 37 Dharan, and Dumal1 (table+). Because the tokens are tightly clustered, they hide one another, malcing it difficult to take an accurate count. It is impossible to decide with certainty whether a circular shape is to be interpreted as a sphere or a disk. Furthermore, X-ray photographs do not show incised or punched markings.
Tokens Enclosed in Envelopes

The total number of tokens which belonged in envelopes amounts to 3+5 (table 5). Accordingly, there is an average of 9 tokens per envelope. In reality, however, there are great discrepancies between the nrunber in each of tl1e clay cases: from 2 to r5. Ten types of tokens were found in envelopes (chart 2). The assemblage is as follows: cones 8.n percent (28 specimens), spheres 33.62 percent (n6), disks II-59 percent (+o), cylinders r6.8r percent (58), tetralledrons 13.91 percent (+8), ovoids 6.66 percent (23), rectangles .29 percent (r), triangles .87 percent (3), paraboloids 2.03 percent (7), animals r.r6 percent (+),and undetermined +-93 percent (17). There is yet no evidence tl1at biconoids, bent coils, rhomboids, vessels, and tools were stored in envelopes but, of course, tllis may be because the sample of tokens held in envelopes is so small.

Table 2. Envelopes Found Broken

.0

~ E ~ · ·a "' ·

-:;

.,

·~
~

"
0

I

E E ~ 0

, " "

g"
f-<
7

OJ,
~ 0 0 v

0

~
7

"'
~

~ -" 0 ~ ~ " ~ " -" -" ~ "' ~ -" " · , , -" " 1 ~ E "' -" ~ " E " "' "'

" " 8 " -"
~
0 u
0 0

~

i'!
0 0

:a
·p
v

.:1

0 E " -"

s
u

-"

s
u

0

0

u

Chagha Mish Farukhabad Habuba Kabira Mll:133

1

1

"'

~

0

u 0

~

1·6
2 6

1 ..., ~ ~ "
~
0

"
0

·~
~
0

.s

il
~

a .E

.0

~ , · .§ " "' · "

"'

g '8"
0
f-<

OJ,

~

·

1

5

I

8
1 1 2 6

co
? 11 6
00

2 6

oo
6

5
3 23

co
3

l-------

Mll:134 Susa Sb 1930

7
2 2 4 2 4 2 2 6 1 2 1 2 1 1 1

7
8 2

Sb 1938 3
Sb 1942 Sb 1967

+
00

3

2

15 2

co
2 6

Sb 5340 Sb 6350
Sb 6946

7
6 1

'inally, three from

co co
00

No Re S.ACR.I.771991.1 2049.1 2067.2 2089.1 2111.2 2111.3 2130.1 1

to investigate the sa, 37 Dharan, and ed, they hide one t is impossible to ~ interpreted as a ·t show incised or

3

8

11

3
1

3
2

?

co co
00

7
1

3 7
6

10 8 6

6

7
1 1 1 2

7 3
2 8 6 1

7

2130.4
2142.2 2142.3 2173.4
Uruk W 20987,3

co
3
8 6

s amounts to 345 : envelope. In reLWnber in each of

3
1 4 1 1

5 1

3 7 7
5

co
00

. The assemblage ·es 33.62 percent ;8), tetrahedrons 1 percent (r), trinals Lr6 percent evidence that bi·red in envelopes os held in enve-

w 20987,7

7
2 4 1 1 1 4 48 1 1 2 1 1 46 5

w 20987,8
w 20987,
15
W20987,17

co co co

9 12 3
2 15 1 2 2 162

TOTAL 5

3

11

9

Table 3. Groups of Tokens Separated from Envelopes

u

u u

8
u

c

~

"0 u

8
c .c
u

~

~
~

'i3

~
'

c
0

{i

B

u

J " "'

~

-"

"'

:a
"'
'

J2

]

-"

"

~ > 2 g ll B " :6 " " ] .c .s ~ ·a ·a " ~I § > .5 :a " ""&· ll -" "'
J2
"d

u

u

"
u

8

c

"0 u

e
u u

~

0

i

~

w
B

u

0

e I;

w ;;

u

5 " 0
~

.5

"0 u

-:1
-~

§
B u "d c

:;j
0
f-< f-<

·

~

E

"'

"

Susa No. N. ber
......

ACR 2067.3 ACR 2091.2

_, 3 _l
1
....

f-

I

8

f-6

3
..........

14

I I
5 9 5 3 3 2 4 5 2 2 4 4
--

4 7

Chagha Mish Uruk W 20987.27

12

13 26

2

10

.......

11 8
8

c"'52 138

TOTAl

16

47

2

11

9

22

3

Table 4. Tokens Tentatively Determined by X rays

0 u

c

~

0 u u

c

~

0 u

c

~

-"

"'

" c " "'
u .c u

B .c
u

~

c c ~ u e .c .:; u ~ c " g " .c ~ ·a > 2 g .c 0 "0 ~ u u u ~ B .c .:; " " .c 8 " u u ~ ·g " u M " c .c " c ·a ·a > "" ~ ~ " -" :a u ~ _w " "' "' 0 .5
I

"0 u

:9 u ~ w -§ c w c

§
-,;

c

"
u

~

B

·E

"'

~

·o

E

·

c "
0

B u

~ 0
f-<
10

:i.l
:OS

c

~

"

Dharan ~-----------+-+-+~--~+------Dumah
Susa Sb 1932

10

3
7 7
13

3 9?
22

9

TOTAL

Table 5. Totals

0 u

~ 0

~ g c .c B e " · "0 0 E u ~ B .c ~ ~ " .c " "0 " ~ .c u " u u 0 -§, ~ g !!> 0 " ~ ·o 0 " ~ j 00 ~ :a u B -" -" " "' "' "'
~ 0
0 u "0

c c ~ u

~ 0

g .c
6 3 2
1?

~

.:;
"@

~

1
5 5

] § ~ ~ w 0 B u 0 E "0 -~ · · ·a 0 .s B B ·s "' · 0
"0
~

.

"0 u 0

"

0

~

f-<

Envelopes Found Complete
Envelopes Found Broken Separated Tokens okens Determined by X rays

4 5 16

1 1 1

2

1
11

6

3 1

23

48
47

9

48 9

12
22

3

2

15 3

1 3

2 5

2 2 4 13.

162 138
22?

11
1?

9

7?
25 2 1

TOTAL

104 12

24

15

1

58

34

12

2

18

1

3

7

4

17

345

"d

E "' " a " " '" "
1

6 0

-:s

c

v

"§
"d

v

§

0

~

f-;

14
----

4

7
4 2
2
--

--

_61_
52

4
5

4

138

Cones, spheres, and tetrahedrons are featured in nvo difi:Crent sizes, small and large; there are flat, lenticular, and high disks; there are exa111ples of incised ovoids and animals and of punched cones and tetrahedrons, bringing the number of token subtypes represented in envelopes to nineteen. Among the nineteen subtypes, twelve are plain subtypes and the remaining seven are complex. The former include cones, large cones, spheres, large spheres, flat disks, lenticular disks, high disks, cylinders, tetrahedrons, large tetrahedrons, ovoids, and rectangles. The latter consist of ptmchcd cones, punched tetrahedrons, incised ovoids, triangles, paraboloids, and two types of animal shapes. As a result, among the 345 tokens enclosed in envelopes, 287 are plain, 32 are complex, and 26 are undetermined (including the 22 tokens included in X-rayed envelopes which cannot show markings). In other words, 83.19 percent of the tokens enclosed in envelopes are plain, 9.28 percent are complex, and 7.54- percent are undetermined. The tokens enclosed in envelopes are identical in types and subtypes to those found loose. Furthermore, the tokens contained in clay cases ·also occur in different sizes: there are, for ex31nple, spheres and large spheres; they bear the same kind of markings, incised or punched. The selection is smaller, probably because the assemblage is also smaller.

STRINGS OF TOKENS AND

49

ENVELOPES

"d

Markings

-:s ~ JO

§

c

v

'"

~

§
·a

~ "d
c
10

· "
3

~ 0
f-;

'i!

c

~

It was a great advantage to have groups of tokens secured in clay cases, often bearing seals of authority. Most envelopes are covered with seal im-

:i1

10

3 91 9

PLAIN TOKENS
2. Spheres 3. Disks

13

22

1 Co_'_" \}

..--_--_-_-_-_.-._t ;:F V I ·_
. ·.. :.~-~
.

C\

::

v

6. Ovoids

7. Rectangles

-:s § ~ ~ ~ .D · -§ "0 0 '" · "

"0 0

"

0
~ 0
f-;

COMPLEX TOKENS
1. Cones 2. Tetrahedrons 6. Ovoids

·

23 2 2 2 4 13. 7 4 17 162 138 22?
10. Parabollae

e

8. Triangles

----~ ::-·
__

5

345

~ ··-·.

.;_

Chart 2. Tokens
included in envelopes.

50

THE EVIDENCE

Fig. 13. Envelope covered with one cylinder seal impression, Susa (Sb 1935),

Iran. Courtesy Mus8e
du Louvre, D8partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

pressions. As a rule, a single cylinder seal was impressed all over the artifact (fig. 13), but there are instances when two or three different seals were used. The major drawback of the envelopes was that they concealed the counters: once the tokens were enclosed, they were no longer visible. While the string of tokens could be checked at all times, it was not possible to verify the contents of an envelope without breaking it and, therefore, without tampering with the sealings. It was probably to overcome this difficulty that systems of markings were developed. The term marking is used to refer to notations on envelopes, sign for notations on tablets. Before proceeding to the description of these various markings, it should be emphasized that the total number of marked specimens arnow1ts to only nineteen specimens, or 9 percent of the total nwnber of artifacts. Envelopes bearing markings are now attested in three sites: Susa, Habuba Kabira, and Tepe Yal1ya. The rarity of envelopes bearing markings can perhaps be attributed to excavation luck; othenvise, it seems to indicate that the usage was not widespread. One method of showing what was inside the envelopes consisted of attaching a set of tokens, presumably identical to those enclosed, onto the outer surface of the case. This was done by sinlting the counters in the clay when it was still soft. This method is represented by a single fragment from Susa, displaying two plain cylinders embedded in the surface (fig. 14) .38 The fact that only one example was recovered suggests that the method was not widely used. Fourteen envelopes, including twelve at Susa 39 and two at Habuba Kabira, bore marltings impressed into their surface when the clay was still soft. In this technique, the markings were shown in one-to-one correspondence;

ill over the artifact
1t seals

were used. aled the cmmters: '· While the string ;ible to verify the )fe~ -without tam:his difficulty that is used to refer to

that is, each token enclosed was indicated by one 1nm·king on the surface of the case. For exa1nple, an envelope holding six tokens displayed six markings. This is supported by the fact that all the envelopes of this category, recovered intact, have a nun1ber of n1arkings equal to the nmnber of tokens enclosed. In other words, only broken envelopes show a discrepancy between the number of markings and the number of associated tokens. The markings indicated not only the number of tokens included but also the shape of each counter. For example, Susa Sb 194-0 yielded three lentiniIar disks and three cylinders which were shown by three circular and three long markings (fig. rs). Nine subtypes of tokens were represented in the thirteen envelopes bearing impressed markings. These include small, large, and punched cones, spheres, lenticular disks, cylinders, incised ovoids and, perhaps, parabolas and animal shapes. Examination of the markings shows that little systematization was used to depict the various tokens, except for spheres and disks. These were translated by different circular markings: the former took the shape of a deep punclil, whereas the latter was a wide, shallow depression. Cones were impressed in several ways, either in profile,40 with the tip, 41 or with the base. 42 In this last instance, the token represented was a large plmched cone, which was thus shown by a shallow circular marking of an even greater diameter than that of a lenticular disk. The cylinders appear as long wedges. The incised ovoids were shown by an oval impression with a small ridge left by the incision at the maximum diameter. There were several ways of impressing the marltings in the soft clay. The

STRINGS OF TOKENS AND ENVELOPES

51

tark:ings, it should s amounts to only ·tifacts. Envelopes Lbuba Kabira, and perhaps be attribilat the usage was

;s consisted of at1elosed, onto the 1unters in the day ;I.e fragment from Lee (fig. 14-). 38 The ' method was not

·o at Habuba Kaclaywas still soft. :correspondence;

Fig. 14. Envelope with a set of tokens sunk into the sutiace, Susa (Sb 5340), Iran. Courtesy Musee du Louvre, D!§partement des Antiquites Orientales.

Fig. 15. Envelope bearing impressed markings corresponding to the tokens held inside, Susa(Sb 1940), Iran. Courtesy Musee du Louvre, oepartement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

most direct, illustrated by M II: 134 of Habuba Kabira, was to press tbe tokens against tbe surface of tbe envelope before enclosing tbem inside. There can be no doubt about this technique, because tbe incised ovoids, found associated witb tbe Habuba Kabira envelope, fit perfecdy in tbe oval cavities left in tbe clay case about fifty-five hundred years ago (fig. r6). It is tempting to speculate tbat tbe metbod of embedding actual tokens into tbe surface of envelopes led to d1e metbod of showing tbeir negative imprint. The second envelope of Habuba Kabira and most examples from Susa exhibited yet anotber metbod of conveying tbe information. In tbese cases, tbe markings were not stamped wid1 tokens but were in1pressed wid1 a stick or stylus. 43 Finally, traces of fingernails(?) on circular in1pressions of a Susa envelope suggest d1at tbey may have been done witb tbe dmmb. 44 Anotber technique consisted of marlting the envelopes when tbe clay was already dry (perhaps as an afterthought?). Consequendy, tbe markings were scratffied ratber tban impressed, malting it more difficult to render tbe shape of tbe counters. In botb specimens of this category tbe number of markings matched tbe tokens but d1eir shape did not. In tbe first example, which comes from Tepe Yal1ya, tbere is litde difference between tbree signs meant to represent two spheres and a cone (fig. 17). In tbe second specimen, from Susa, no effort was made to match tbe shapes of six spheres, which were sin1ply indicated by six strokes, whereas a large sphere and flat disk were shown, apparendy, by a circular and a triangular punch mark.45 Seven specin1ens, again from Susa, were punctured tbrough tbe thickness of tbe wall at diametrical ends. 46 The perforations have been interpreted by some as a means of preventing tbe artifacts from brealting while firing. 47 It is more likely, however, tbat tbe perforations allowed tbe passage of a string holding a nun1ber of tokens duplicating tbe set inside. The per-

STRINGS OF TOKENS AND ENVELOPES

53

, was to press the >sing them inside. he incised ovoids, erfectly in the oval ; ago (fig. r6). It is oal tokens into the negative imprint. oles from Susa exJn. In these cases, ,ressed with a stick )ressions of a Susa thumb. 44 Jes when the clay ntly, tl1e markings :icult to render the ·ry the number of the first example, ::tween three signs second specimen, ;ix spheres, which here and flat disk nchmark. 45 hrough the thick; have been inter·m brealcing while lowed the passage 't inside. The per-

Fig. 16. Envelope bearing the impression of incised ovoids, Habuba Kabira (M II: 134), Syria. Photo by Klaus Anger; courtesy Museum fur Vor- und FrOhgeschichte, Berlin.

·
forated envelopes can be considered, therefore, as yet another possible technique for indicating the contents of envelopes. In all cases except one, the information conununicated by the markings on the envelopes pertained to the number and types of the tokens enclosed. A unique envelope of Susa, marked with a cross, shows on the X-ray photograph a yield of eight tokens!' In tl1is case, the sign apparently did not communicate the number or the shape of the tokens inside. Instead, the

Fig. 17. Envelope bearing three markings, scratched in after the clay had dried, Tepe Yahya, Iran. Courtesy Peabody Museum, Harvard University.

54

THE EVIDENCE

infOrmation concerned, perhaps, the nature of the transaction. Alternatively, the marking could be an accountant's colophon. that many techniques were devised for showing the token contents of envelopes: ( r) attaching tokens to the smface; (2) stamping the tokens in the soft clay; (3) impressing signs with a stick or stylus; (4) pressing with the thumb; (5) scratching the clay when hard; and (6?) securing by a string. Most proved to be dead ends and disappeared. But token in1pressions and markings inscribed with a blunt stylus were carried over to the first tablets. They were the beginning of writing. Envelopes, which started as an accessory to the token system, can1e to transform it in the most unexpected way. They triggered the mutation of the threedimensional tokens into two-dimensional graphic symbols. This unique event was to have important consequences for cmnmunication.
IT IS INTERESTING

J1Saction. Altcrna-

Impressed Tablets

CHAPTER FOUR

d for showing the surface; (2) stamph a stick or stylus; · when hard; and ; and disappeared. blunt stylus were ; of writing. Envecaine to transform ation of the threebois. This unique cation.

And when we consider the first uses to which writing was put, it would seem quite clear that it was connected first and foremost with power: it was used for inventories) catalogues) censuses) laws and instructions; in all instances) whether the aim was to keep a check on material possessions or on human beings) it is evidence ofthe pvwer exercised by some men over other men and aver worldly possessions.
-CLAUDE LEVI ~STRAUSS l

THE SYSTEM OF MARKINGS

on clay envelopes ushered in a new phase of the token system. At first, the impressed notations were ancillary to the counters, bnt eventnally they supplanted them. This occurred when solid clay tablets bearing impressed signs replaced tbe hollow envelopes holding tokens. These impressed signs still perpetuated tbe shape of tbe tokens, but tbey assumed an entirely new function. Whereas the markings on envelopes repeated only the message encoded in the tokens held witbin, tbe signs impressed on tablets were the message. The first tablets were a decisive step in the invention of writing and amounted to a revolution in commtmication technology. This chapter deals witb the earliest tablets bearing signs in the shape of tokens. I will docmnent the number of these artifacts recovered and recount their geographic distribution (map 3), context, and chronology. I will describe tbe tablets and tbe signs they bear. Most important, I will trace the evolution from tokens to markings on envelopes and impressed signs on tablets. Finally, I will show that impressed signs are tbe immediate forerunners of the Sumerian pictographic script.
NUMBER

The total number of impressed tablets, complete or fragmentary, included in the present study a1nounts to about 240. The 1najority, some rso specimens, come from Iran. The 90 tablets from Susa have been recovered in successive excavation campaigns from 1912 to 1977. 2 Forty-two specimens were excavated in Godin Tepe, 3 Il from Sialk,' and I from Tall-iGhazir. 5 Six of an undisclosed number of impressed tablets are published for Chogha Mish. 6 The number oflraqi exanaples is about 67. Information is available on 65 impressed tablets from Uruk.' There is a single specimen from Khafaje' and a fragment from Nineveh.' There are 25 tablets from Syria, witb ro coming from Habuba Kabira, 10 IJ from Jebel Aruda, 11 I from Tell Bralc, 12 and I from Mari. 13

iii;;: rro

'""" Sii ~
0

~

0
0

~

"'
Distribution of Tablets

W+E
N

s

· Tell Brak
Marie

Nineveh

e Godin Tepe
· Tepe Sialk

· Khafaje

0

400km

CONTEXT
In the sites yielding impressed tablets as well as envelopes, the two kinds of
artifacts are found in the same context. At Susa, tablets and envelopes were located in the same area of the Acropolis, in some cases in the same building and the same room and, in one instance, even in the same container. 1'1

IMPRESSED TABLETS

57

Building 2 of Habuba Kabira produced impressed tablets as well as envelopes.15 Forty tablets from Uruk belonged to the sancmary ofEanna, as did twenty-five envelopes. An additional twenty were discovered in the Anu Ziggurat, the second major sancn1ary ofUruk, where so far no envelopes have been uncovered. Several of these tablets lay in situ on the floor of the White Temple. 16 AB a rule the impressed tablets were located, like the envelopes, in temple precincts and administrative buildings. At Godin Tepe, the largest cache of tablets came from the gate house at the entrance of the compound, and a second group came from an imposing building probably used for official functions. 17

CHRONOLOGY
The impressed tablets can be divided into three closely consecntive gronps, ranging from about 3500 to JOOO B.C. The first group, dated to ca. 3500 B.C., includes the impressed tablets of Susa rS and Habuba Kabira. Some of the tablets from Eanna and Chugha Mish might also belong to the period ofUruk VI. The tablets ofSusa 17 date between 3300 and JIOO B.C. They are contemporaneous with the twenty-nine tablets of the Red Temple of Uruk and with those of the Anu Ziggurat in Urulc IVa. 18 The forty-three tablets of Godin Tepe, including one specimen bearing an incised sign, may be included in this second group, 19 together with those from Jebel Aroda, whose
carbon 14 dates cluster around 3200
B.C.
20

0

The tablets of Sialic and Tall-i-Ghazir, associated with high beveled-rim bowls (Blumentopf), Proto-Elamite sealings, and lugged jars with rope applique bands, belong to the third group, estimated to Umk III and Susa r6, or about JIOO to JOOO B.c. The seal impression on the Nineveh tablet suggests a similar date, although it has been assigned to level V, dated to 29002500 B.c. 21

The chronology of the impressed tablet is important because it clearly demonstrates that impressed signs preceded pictography by an interval of
about two hundred years, or some eight generations. There are no picto-

graphic texts contemporaneous with the earliest group of impressed tablets from Susa r8 and Urulc VI-IVc. The earliest evidence of pictography consists of a group of tablets recovered on the floor of Temple C, in Uruk Oc XVI 3: "On the floor, uuder the collapsed roof of Temple C's T-shaped
hall, in level IVa." These seven tablets may be as early as Uruk Nb 22 or as

late as IVa. 23 Consequently, it is about

JJOO-JIOO B.C.,

during tl1e period

58

THE EVIDENCE

of the second group of impressed tablets, that the two kinds of writing began to coexist. This is illustrated at Godin Tepe 24 and at Sialk, where the two types of tablets were found together. 25

DESCRIPTION

All the in1pressed tablets were made of clay, except for twenty-two plaster specimens recovered in the Anu Ziggurat ofUruk. 26 The tablets are small, fitting comfortably in the palm of the hand. On average, they are about 5 em wide, 4 em long, and 2 em thick. They are modeled in various shapes, with the lack of standardization typical of a new craft. A number are oval, some r0lmdish, others square or rectangular. The profile of the tablets is also highly variable, and while most specimens are convex, some are flat and still others are plano-convex. Many of these documents were authenticated by seals. The seal impressions cover the impressed signs, showing that the tablets were first inscribed and then sealed.

THE SIGNS

For the salce of clarity, I call the notations on tablets signs, whereas those on envelopes are referred to as markings. Seventeen signs can be identified on the impressed tablets.
l. SHORT WEDGE
A. small (fig. rS)
B. large (fig. 19)

20) D. sideways E. apex to apex (fig. 21)

c. plmched (fig.

Fig. 18. Tablet showing a line of four circular signs followed by a line of four short wedges, Godin Tepe (Gd 73-i9), Iran. Courtesy T. Cuyler Young, Jr.

kinds of \Vriting I at Sialk, where the

/0

IMPRESSED TABLETS

59

twenty-two plaster 1e tablets arc s1nall, they are about 5 em arious shapes, with 1ber are oval, some · the tablets is also me are flat and still e authenticated by )Wing that the tab-

, whereas those on n be identified on

Fig. 19. Tablet with three large wedges, one shallow circular marking, and four deep circular markings, Susa (Sb 2313), Iran. Courtesy Mus8e du Louvre, 08partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

Fig. 20. Unlisted sign similar to a token in the shape of a cylinder with all-over strokes (type 4: 10/11), Uruk (VV 20973), Iraq. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

60

THE EVIDENCE

2. DEEP CIRCULAR
A.

B.

c.
D. E. F.

small (fig. r8) large semicircular incised (fig. 22) punched appen<.lix

Fig. 21. Tablet with five short wedges, two triangular signs, and

one apex-to-apex sign,
Godin Tepe (Gd 73291), Iran. Courtesy

T. Cuyler Young, Jr.

Fig. 22. Impressed

tablet with deep circular incised and triangular
incised signs, Susa

(Sb 1975 bis), Iran. Courtesy Musee du Louvre, D8partement des Antiquites Orientales. Drawing by
Ellen Simmons. (The tablet is shown upside

down.)

IMPRESSED TABLETS

61

Fig. 23. Impressed tablet, long wedges, Susa (Sb 6291), Iran. Courtesy Mus8e du Louvre, 08partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

3. SHALLOWCIRCULAR
A.

lenticular

B. flat (fig. 19)

4. LONG WEDGE (fig. 23)

5. OVAL
6. TRIANGULAR
A.
B.

plain incised (fig.

22)

The Layout

Most tablets are inscribed on tbe obverse only, but some bear additional notations on the reverse or along the edges. 27 In the latter two cases~ each face presents a separate account~ and in no instance does the reverse indicate a total, as is tbe case in later pictographic tablets. Some tablets were turned like tbe page of a book to read the second face, 28 but otbers were turned on a horizontal axis. 29 The signs are normally organized in horizontal lines parallel to tbe longer side of tbe tablet. Signs of clifferent types are usually not mixed within the same line. Instead~ each line consists of identical signs. For example, a line of circular signs is followed by a line of wedges (fig. 18). When there are only a few signs in a line, tbey are placed in the center, rather tban to tbe side. The signs are by no means randomly aligned but are organized in hierarchical order. The largest units, placed at the top of tbe tablets, are followed by lines of signs of decreasing value. For example, a line of circular signs standing for large measures of grain precedes a line of wedges, which, as will be shown later, represented smaller units of grain (fig. 18). Because each line consisted of series of identical signs, tbe tablets could

62

THE EVIDENCE

Fig. 24. Impressed tablet, boustrophedon, Godin Tepe (Gd 73292), Iran. Courtesy

T. Cuyler Young, Jr.

be read in any direction. Several specimens indicate, however, that writing usually proceeded from top to bottom and from right to left and perhaps continued in the opposite direction (boustrophedon). Among these examples, a tablet from Godin Tepe has a complete line of signs in the upper part of the tablet and the two last units are added below (fig. 24 ). 30 Sb 2313 from Susa illustrates how, on the few occasions when a line is composed of different signs, the larger units were at the right, followed by lesser units toward the left. Since the scribes placed the signs in hierarchical order, starting with the largest units, we may logically deduce that the signs on the right were written before those on the left (fig. 19). Finally, tablet 73-292 of Godin Tcpe has a line starting from the right and a second line starting from the left, or boustrophedon (fig. 24). 31
The Technique of Impression

The techniques for impressing signs on tablets were the same as those used for envelopes. Signs were still made by pressing tokens against the surface of the tablets. This is visibly the case for Sb 2313 of Susa (fig. 19 ), which bears three large wedges showing distinctly the entire outline of the cone used for impressing them. The signs corresponding to pinched spheres, biconoids, ovoids, and triangles had to be impressed with tokens since no stylus could have achieved such shapes. In other cases, circular signs and wedges were impressed with a blw1t stylus. Some signs can be described as representing a mixed impressed/incised technique (signs 2d and 6b above). On Sb 1975 bis from Susa, a token triangle was impressed four times on the face of the tablet, and each of these triangular impressions was completed by a vertical incision performed with a pointed stylus (fig. 22), reproducing a triangle with an incised line (type 8: n).

The Evolution from Tokens to Signs

IMPRESSED TABLETS

63

Each of the seventeen impressed signs can be traced to a token prototype. Considering the limited sampling of nineteen marked envelopes and 240 tablets 1 it is remarkable that in seven instances the develop1nent fron1 tokens to markings on envelopes and signs on tablets can be fully documented. The relevant infonnation will be presented below, as fOllows:

A. B. C. D. E.

A type of token found at large. The same token enclosed in an tmmarked envelope. The corresponding marking on the surface of an envelope. The matching sign impressed on a tablet. The occurrence on a pictographic tablet as an i1npressed sign, an incised pictograph, or an impressed/incised sign. F. The proposed translation.

that writing to left and perhaps . Among these exf signs in the upper . (fig. 24). 30 Sb 2JIJ line is composed of wed by lesser milts rchical order~ startIt the signs on the tally, tablet 73-292 econd line starting

~wever~

A complete list of all the artifacts involved will not be given. Where possible, a tentative interpretation of the signs will be provided._ These interpretations correspond to those of M. W. Green and Hans J. Nissen, 32 Hans J. Nissen, Peter Damerow, and Robert K. Englund, 33 Adam Falkenstein,34 Joran Friberg, 35 or A. A. Vainlan. 36 It should betmderstood that the Smnerian standardized units which these authors are citing reflect the highly orgarlized city-state society of the late fomth to early third millennia. The meaning of the signs and of their prehistoric token prototypes will be discussed in the concluding section of this chapter. la. SHORTWEDGE Cone, type r: r. Unmarked envelope: ChoghaMish, 37 Susa. 38 c. Marking on envelope: Tepe Yahya (fig. 17),39 Susa. 40 D. Impressed sign: Chogha Mish, 41 Godin Tepe,42 Jebel Aruda, 43 Khafaje,44 Sialk, 45 Susa,46 Urulc. 47 E. ATU 892/ZATU N-r (impressed). F. Measure of grain (r ban?). 48
A.
B.

same as those used against the surface sa (fig. 19 ), which 'utline of the cone nched spheres, bih tokens since no circular signs and

Comment: On the envelope Sb 1927, from Susa, cones were represented by pressing the tips of the counters into the clay, rather than pressing the complete counter sideways, thns resulting in mostly circular markings. 49 This same technique was perhaps perpetuated on one tablet of Susa. 50

impressed/incised Sus a, a token triand each of these 'n performed with ll an incised line

lb. LARGEWEDGE Large cone, type r: 2. Unmarked envelope: Chogha Mish." c. Marking on envelope: Susa." D. Impressed sign: JebelAruda, 53 Susa (fig. 19). 54
A.
B.

64

THE EVIDENCE

E.
F.

ATU 899/ZATU N-34 (impressed). Measure of grain (I8o ban?). 55

lc. PUNCHED WEDGE
Ptmchcd cone, type 1: 19. B. Um11arked envelope: None. c. Marking on envelope: Susa. 56
A.
D.

E.
F.

Impressed sign: Uruk (fig. 20). ATU 905/ZATU N-48 (impressed). Measure of grain (r,8oo ban?). 57 Unit ofland measure (r efe?). 58
Comment: The only punched cone enclosed in an envelope was
translated by the impression of its base, leaving a large circular mark-

ing rather than a ptmched wedge. ld. HORIZONTAL WEDGE
A.

Cone, type r: r.

D. Impressed sign: Godin Tepe. 59 E. ATU 9I8 (impressed).

F. Fraction. 60

Unit ofland measure (I/4 iku?). 61 le. TWO WEDGES APEX TO APEX
A. D. E. F.

Cone, type I: I Impressed sign: Godin Tcpe (fig. 2I). 62 ATU 9I8 (impressed). Measure of grain ( r/ro ban?). 63

2a. CIRCULAR SIGN Sphere, type 2: r. Unmarked envelope: Chogha Mish, 64 Susa,'·5 Uruk. 66 c. Marking on envelope: Susa, 67 Tepe Yahya." 69 D. Impressed sign: Godin Tepc, Jebel Aruda,'0 Habuba Kabira, 71
A.
B.

KhafJje, 72 Nineveh, 73 Sialk,74 Susa,7 5 Uruk:/6
E. F.

ATU 897/ZATU N-14 (impressed). Unit of grain (I bariga?). 77
Comment: In one instance an envelope holding six spheres showed
six strokes on the outside. 78 The markings were scratched when the

clay had already hardened and when it was no longer possible to
i1npress the tokens.

2b. LARGE CIRCULAR SIGN
A.
B.

Large sphere, type 2: 2. Enclosed in unmarked envelope: Chogha Mish, 79 Susa. "'

D.

c. Marking on envelope: None. Impressed sign: Susa, 81 Habuba Kabira, 82 Jebel Anlda. 83 E. ATU 9IJ/ZATU N-45 (impressed). F. Unit of grain metrology (10 bariga?)." Comment: None of the envelopes containing large spheres featured 1narkings. It can only be presumed that large spheres came to be represented by deep circular rnarkings, larger than those standing for small spheres. This hypothesis is supported by impressed tablets, such as those of Habuba Kabira, showing the existence of deep circular markings of different sizes and organized in separate lines. 85

IMPRESSED TABLETS

65

n an envelope was large circular mark-

2c. SEMI-CIRCULAR Half sphere, type z: 24. Umuarked envelope: None. c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Godin Tepe," Sialk."
A.
B.

Comment: The half sphere is one of the earliest token subtypes; it is found in many assemblages but never occurs in large numbers. This explains, perhaps, why none has ever been recovered in an envelope and why the corresponding sign is also infrequently used on tablets.

2d. CIRCULAR SIGN WITH ONE INCISION
A. Notched sphere, type 2: 7·

Umuarked envelope: None. c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Susa (fig. 22)."' E. ATU 898/ZATUN·IS (impressed). F. Measure of grain(?) (I bariga?). 89 Unit ofland measure (I/8 iku?). 90
B.

·uk. 66

2e. PUNCHED CIRCULAR SIGN Habuba Kabira,"
A.

Punched sphere, type 2: 3.

B. Umuarked envelope: None.

c. Marking on envelope: None.
D. Impressed tablet: Tall-i-Ghazir." E. ZATU N-so (impressed). F. Unit ofland measure ( w bur?). 92

six spheres showed scratched when the longer possible to

2f. CIRCULAR WITH AN APPENDIX
A. Pinched sphere, type z: 15. B. Unmarked envelope: None. c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Susa. 93

9

Susa.so

66

THE EVIDENCE

E.

F.

ATU 781/ZATU 24-0 (incised). Fat-tailed sheep.
Comment: The sign ATU 781/ZATU 24-0 shares the same outline
but bears an additional incised cross.

3a. SHALLOW CIRCULAR MARKING

Flat disk, type 3: I. Unmarked envelope: Chagha Mish/4 Susa,95 Uruk. 96 c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Susa. 97 E. ATU 907 (impressed). F. Unitofgrainmetrology(1). 98
A.
B.

Comment: Lenticular disks (type 3: 3) are represented by shallow circular markings on two envelopes from Susa. 99 However, none of the envelopes containing fiat disks bears markings. It can only be hypothesized tbat tbey too were represented by large shallow circular markings showing, probably, a more defined outline tl1an the lenticular disks. The value of the fiat disk may be hypotl1esized from tbe tokens with which tbey are associated. It is probably meaningful tbat in four instances when disks witl1 straight edges were included in envelopes, they were associated with small spheres 100 or with small and large spheres. 101 The association of spheres and flat disks in envelopes seems to correspond with the association of deep and shallow circular impressed signs on tablets. 102

3b. CIRCULAR SIGN DERIVING FROM THE LENTICULAR DISK
A.
B.

Lenticnlar disk, type 3:

IO.

Unmarked envelope: Susa. 103

D.

c. Marking on envelope: Susa (fig. rs).'" Impressed sign: ChoghaMish,'" 5 JebelAmda, 106 Susa, 107 TellBrak, 108
Uruk.I09
F.

Unitofanin1alnumeration (10 animals?). 110
Comment: Lenticular disks held in envelopes were mostly associated witl1 cylinders. 111 When these two kinds of tokens are translated into marltings, tbey appear as shallow circnlar markings and long wedges. Accordingly, I presmne that when circular signs are associated on a tablet witb long wedges, they can be understood as deriving from tbe lenticular disk. 1 "

4. LONG WEDGE
A. B.

Cylinder, type 4-: 1. Unmarked envelope: Susa,' 13 Uruk. 114

es the same outline

c. Markings on envelope: Susa (fig. 15). 11 s 116 D. Impressed sign: Godin Tepe., Habuba Kabira., 117 Jebel Aruda., 118 Susa (fig. 23), 119 Tell Brak, 120 Uruk. 121 122 F. Unit of animal numeration (1animal?).

IMPRESSED TABLETS

67

Sa. OVAL
A. Ovoid, type 6:
B.
D.
I.

rulc96

Umnark.ed envelope: Uruk. 123

c. Marking on envelope: None. Impressed sign: Chagha Mish, m Habuba Kabira, 125 Jebel Aruda.""

5b. INCISED OVOID
A.

·esentcd by shallow

9

However, none of ngs. It can only be

Ovoid witl1 an incised circular line, type 6: 14. B. Unmarked envelope: Uruk (fig. 12).'27

large shallow circu'd outline tl1an the · hypotl1esized from robably meaningful -dges were included
spheres 100 or with

c. Marking on envelope: HabubaKabira (fig. 16). 128 D. Impressed sign: None. E. ATU 733/ZATU 393· F. Oil.
Comment: The incised ovoid is included here even though it is not represented on an impressed tablet but only as a marking on an envelope. On the envelope M II: 134, from Habuba Kabira, it is clear tl1at the markings were made by impressing the colmters into the clay wall, for the resnlting oval impressions show a small ridge corresponding to the incision on the token. There is conflicting information concerning M II: 133. In tllis case, the markings may be simple wedges done with a stylus.

'heres and flat disks ciation of deep and

'JCULARDISK

6a. PLAIN TRIANGULAR
A. Triangle, type 8: 2.

Susa, 107 Te11Brak, 108

~e mostly associated

kens are translated markings and long

Enclosed in unmarked envelope: Uruk, 129 Chagha Mish. 130 c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Godin Tepe (fig. 21). 131 E. ATU 935/ZATUN-39a (impressed). F. Measure of grain (1/5 ban?). 132
B.

lar signs are associnderstood as deriv-

6b. INCISED TRIANGULAR Triangle with a median incised line, type 8: B. Unmarked envelope: None. c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Susa (fig. 22). 133 E. Impressed/incised sign: Susa. 134 F. Unit of wheat(?) 135
A. II.

68

THE EVIDENCE

BEYOND THE IMPRESSED TABLETS: PICTOGRAPHY

The docun1entation presented above shows that the impressed tablets represented only a transitional phase of writing leading to pictography- in this case, the graphic representation of tokens. The chart on pages 69-70 illustrates how son1e of the impressed signs were supplanted by pictographs traced with a sharp stylus. For example, oval and triangular signs evolved into incised pictographs, while still other signs bccan1e impressed/incised. On the other hand, wedges and circular signs remained impressed, creating a dichotomy bcnveen two kinds of scripts: impressed and pictographic. In the following section, I will discuss how the en1ergence of two different scripts may be explained by the two kinds of prototypes: plain and complex tokens.

The Tokens as Prototypes of Impressed Signs

The most common types of tokens, which pervaded the entire Near Eastcones, spheres, disks, and cylinders- gave rise to the most common in1-

pressed signs. These counters, including punched cones and spheres, are also among the most ancient token shapes, occurring among the earliest
assemblages of Tepe Asiab and Ganj Dareh Tepe and persisting witbout discontinuity until the fourth millennium B.C. Perhaps most significant, cones, punched cones, spheres, disks, and cylinders are among the subtypes most frequently held in envelopes and, subsequently, most commonly translated into impressed markings on tbe surface of envelopes. This suggests tlut tbe fashion in which tokens were kept in archives detennined the resulting script. Sign impression was the most ancient and also the most rudimentary of tbe two early forms of writing. The major drawback of tbe impressed techtuque was tl1e blurring of the shapes of tbe token prototypes. For example, tokens of distinctive forms- such as cones and cylinders, or disks and spheres- were transcribed, respectively, into closely related wedges or circular signs. As a result, tbe signs were identified by context ratber tl1an by shape. Thus, short and long wedges representing cones and cylinders were distinguished by tbeir position on tl1e tablet: tbe long wedges were systematically placed near the edge of a tablet, 136 whereas rl1e short wedges were traced at the center of the field. 137 The circular signs deriving from spheres and lenticular disks could be set apart by their association witb otber signs. Those standing for spheres were combined with short wedges,' 38 tbose representing lenticular disks were combined witb long wedges. 139

The Tokens as Prototypes of Impressed/Incised Signs

Notched spheres (type 2: 7) 140 and incised triangles (type 8: n) were tbe prototypes for impressed/incised signs. These signs are very important because tbey attest to tl1e close relationsllip between impressed and incised signs. They show, beyond any donbt, tl1at tbe incised pictographs came

IY
Sign Token
Enclosed

pressed tablets rep·o pictography- in trt on pages 69-70 1ted by pictographs gular signs evolved impressed/incised. impressed, creating 1d pictographic. In ce of two different plain and complex

in mvclope

Marleing on envelope

Sign imp1-essed on tablet

Incised pictogmph

IMPRESSED TABLETS

69

x signifies occurrence; a blank signifies no evidence

La

l.b

Lc

X

entire Near Eastnest common im~s and spheres, are among the earliest persisting without

l.d

:res, disks, and cylnvelopes and, subukings on the sur11 tokens were kept

l.o:

X

Jst rudimentary of he impressed techypes. For example, iers, or disks and Lted wedges or cirtext rather than by md cylinders were vedges were systeshort wedges were ving from spheres 1 with other signs. :dges, 138 those rep~es. 139

2.a

0

X

·

2.b

0

X

·
D

·

pe 8: n) were the ·ery important be~essed and incised pictographs came

70

THE EVIDENCE

Sign

Tolun

Enclosed in en11e!ope

Ma1·king on em,elope

Sign impressed on tablet

Incised pictOlf1'aph

x signifies occurrence; a blank signifies no evidence

l.e

®
\..1

n

2.f

e
.

.

3.b

.. 0
I I
I

0: ~
~
I

4

S.a

(;j
lA \/

~

I

·

S.b

'

6.a

6.b

impressed blet

Incised pictograph

I

~

as the third and final step of the evolution from tokens to writing. The incised triangle is of particular interest since one can trace it through the following four stages of evolution: (1) complex token, (2) impressed sign, (3) impressed/incised sign, and (4-) pictograph. Although the incised triangles were among the more frequent subtypes of fourth-millennium complex tokens, none so tar has been found enclosed in an envelope. ln1pressions of incised triangles occur on the ''solid clay ball" of Susa. 141 The impressed/incised sign that followed consisted in complementing a triangular token impression with an incised marking (fig. 22).'" Finally came the pictograph ATU 900.
The Tokens as Prototypes of Incised Pictographs

IMPRESSED TABLETS

71

X

Four more impressed signs/markings evolved into incised pictographs. The technique was not new: tokens had been marked by incised lines as early as the beginning of the system in the eighth millennium B.c., and incised markings became especially important with the complex tokens of the fourth millennium. However, the use of a stylus to trace signs on a tablet followed the impressed script, constimting a third stage in the evolution of writing in the Near East (after markings on envelopes and impressed signs). The resulting incised signs had the advantage of being far more legible than those which were impressed. The incised signs represented with greater accuracy the profile of the token prototypes, as well as the marltings displayed on their surface. This was an important feature because the pictographs derived mosrly from complex tokens characterized by linear marltings. Among the impressed markings which evolved into pictographs, the incised ovoids (type 6: 14-) are most important because rl1ey can be traced at each of the four steps of the evolution. First, incised ovoids were among the 1nost common complex tokens in fourth-millennium sites; second, they were held in unmarked envelopes at Uruk; 143 third, rl1ey appear as impressed markings on an envelope from Habuba Kabira; 144 and fourth, rl1ey become the incised pictograph ATU 733/ZATU 293. There is, however, no known corresponding impressed sign. The rl1ree remaining token subtypes perpetuated both by impressed signs and pictographs include pinched spheres (type 2: 15), plain ovoids (type 6: r), and plain triangles (type 8: 2). These tokens can be matched to ATU 781/ZATU 24-o, 145 ATU 732/ZATU 280, 709, and ATU 4-28/ZATU 254-. All these tokens are typically complex and, except for the plain ovoids, are never part of assemblages prior to the middle of the fourth millennmmB.C. The last and most important category of complex tokens that contributed to the Sumerian pictographic script has thus far not been identified in envelopes. That is perhaps because so few envelopes are known, but more likely it is because, as I have discussed in the previous chapter, complex tokens were often perforated and therefore were probably attached by a string when they were held in archives. Their listing includes rl1e examples in rl1e chart on pages 72-78.

Token Type

Pictograph

Tmnslation

l. Animals
3: 14
ATU 803 ZATU 482c lamb

3: 51

ATU 761

sheep (fig. 25)

ZATU 575

3: 54

ATU 763

ewe

ZATU57l

v
~

14: 3

ATU 45a ZATU 12

cow

14: 8

ATU 30 ZATU 145

dug

Fig. 25. Sign ATU 761/ ZATU 575, "sheep," Uruk 0fV 21418.4), Iraq. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

Tmnslation

Token Type

Pictograph

Translation

1. Animals
lamb
ATU 535 ZATU 196

2. Foods
bread

sheep (fig. 25)

ATU 733 ZATU 393

oil

'w'

ATU 539 ZATU 197

food

cow

ATU 428

sweet (honey?)

ZATU 254

dog

ATU 750 ZATU 503

sweet (honey?)

ATU 139

ZATU 88b

0

ATU 158 ZATU 296a

sheep's milk

3. Textiles
ATU 758
textik: 117

ZATU 452b

ATU 798

wooJHS

ZATU 452b

Token Type

Pictograph

Translation

~

3: 22

<J1ID>
3: 24

ZATU 452c

type of garment or cloth

· @
.

·
0

Zi\TU 452b

type of garment or cloth 14~

3, 28

ATU 755 ZATU 555

type of garment or cloth 1-'U

e
Fig. 26. Sign ZATU 452e, "textile," Uruk 0N 9657), Iraq. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

8

3, 30

ATU759 ZATU452e

type of garment or"cloth 151

3, 32

ZATU452e

type of garment or cloth (fig. 26) 152

Translation

Token Type

Pictograph

Translation

type of garment
or cloth

EB:
IT:IrriJ]
4: 23

I II I II If!

type of garment or cloth 15 '

type of garment or dothl19

PI 385 ZATU452a

wool, fleecc 15f

type of garment
or clothl5o

ATU 508

rope

type of garment
ordothl5r

7: 18

ATU 589 ZATU764

type of mat or

rug

type of garment
or cloth (fig.
26)15~

10:4

ATU 390/829 ZATU 662/663

type of garment or cloth 155

10: 9

type of garment
or clothl56

10: 12

(\

PI 158

type of garment
or cloth 157

ATU685 ZATU644

type of garment or cloth 158

4. Types of Containers
ATU736 ZATU394

Tolun Type

Pictograph

Translation

7: 31

ATU 568 ZATU 616

gr,marv

13: 6

ATU 674 ZATU 126

5. Commodities
I: 38, 39

ZATU 267

pcrfi.rme

8: 14

ZATU63

metal

8: 15

ATU 545

metal

8: 17

ATU 703 ZATU 301

mct.tl

8: 18

ATU 545 ZATU 63

mcml

9o 13

ZATU 293

bracelet. ring

l4o lO

ZATU 379

bed

Translation

Token T_vpe

Picto'-qraph

Translation

granary

5. Commodities
perfUme

o6 ' ®
CD

6. Service/Work
5: I ATU 526 ZATU 280
make, build

7. Miscellaneous
1: 33 ZATU N 38
numlx:r(?)

unrecorded

(W 21090)

3: 19

CD

ATU 754 ZATU 127

metal

4: 20
metal

ZATU 779

4: 24
meml

unrecorded

(W 20973) (fig. 20)

metal

()

ATU 403 ZATU 659

ATU 406
hracekt, ring

ZATU 661

bed

Token Type

Pictograph

Translation

6: 1

D
0

ATU 732 ZATU280

nail(?)

7: 12

ATU 559

ATU709

·e
~

8: 37

ATU712 ZATU83

ATU434

ATU 434

' [L

ATU429 ZATU 293(?)

16:6

ATU17 ZATU82

foot

Translation

nail(?)

Comment: The meaning of tetrahedrons remains enigmatic. They are among the plain tokens which arc both consistently found at large and most frequently included in envelopes. It is to be expected, therefOre, that they vvcre perpetuated in writing. However, none of the envelopes that hold tetrahedrons bears i1npressed markings; nor do we yet have an impressed tablet with triangular i1npressions. It is possible that the tetrahedron represented a docket or unit of work. 159 The tetrahedron correlates with the two triangular signs ATU 403/ZATU 659, identified by Rene Labat as !agar ("temple servant"), 100 or to ATU 526/ZATU z8o, KAK (du3), traditionally interpreted as "1nake, build.'' Clay dockets in the shape of tetrahedrons were used, for example, at Sip par in the third and second millennia B.C."' The date and name of individuals written on the dockets malce it clear that the objects were 1neant to be exchanged against rations of barley as wages. Perhaps these late dockets perpetuated both the shape and the meaning of the prehistoric tokens. This idea seems plausible, for manpower was an iinportant co111111odity of exchange in the ancient Near East. This is attested by the numerous texts referring to workmen digging canals, constructing buildings, and harvesting fields. If the tetral1edrons truly represent a lmit of work, it wonld be logical to assume that the various sizes of the tokens expressed time units such as one day's work (or one week's or one month's), unless they referred to different salary rates according to the size of a team or the kind of labor.
IN SUM, certain tokens, mostly plain, were perpetuated by in1pressed signs while otl1ers, mostly complex, were transcribed into incised pictographs. It is evident that complex tokens, characterized by multiple markings, did not lend the1nselves to being i1npressed and were more conveniently translated by signs traced with a stylus. However, tl1e reason why two different styles of script developed may lie in the way tokens were handled in various offices. Cones, plmched cones, spheres, disks, and cylinders were mostly kept in envelopes- and tl1erefore carne to be translated by impressed markings. On the other hand, complex tokens were perforated and strung and thns were never transcribed into impressed markings. In turn, the different ways of keeping tokens in archives may be explained by the sort of goods each type of token represented. The plain tokens represented products of the far1n and the countryside, whereas complex tokens stood for goods manufactured in the city. It is therefore logical to assnme that the two types of tokens were handled by different hands in different offices. It is noteworthy that the incised ovoids were exceptional in being sometimes kept in envelopes and sometimes perforated in order to be strung. At Untie, for example, in tl1e collection of tl1irty incised ovoids, ten were held in envelopes (fig. rz) ' 62 and five 163 were perforated. This may explain why the incised ovoids were transcribed both into impressed and incised signs.

IMPRESSED TABLETS

79

foot

80

THE EVIDENCE

THE MEANING OF SIGNS AND THEIR CORRESPONDING TOKENS

The key to understanding the meaning of pictographs, impressed markings and, ulti1nately., tokens lies in the ctmeiform script of the third millennium B.C. Assyriologists can, in some instances., trace the evolution of cuneiform characters backward through more and more archaic forms to their prototypes in the late fourth millennium B.C. The interpretation of pictographs and impressed signs proposed here is the outcome of such research by A. Falkenstein, M. W. Green, S. Langdon, K. Szarzynska, and A. A. Vaiman, all of whom assun1ed that, logically, the original signs carried the sJ111e meaning as the derived cuneiform signs. In nwn, it is logical to trust that the impressed signs perpetuated the meaning of their token prototypes.

c s· 'I

Impressed Signs

Plain Cones, Spheres, and Flat Disks: Metrological Units of Grain(?)
Thureau Dangin in 1932 had inferred that the impressed wedges and circular signs stood for metrological units used specifically for grain. 164 This is also the outcome of more recent work by A. A. Vaiman, Joran Friberg, and Hans J. Nissen, Peter Damerov, and Robert K. Engllmd. '" Friberg proposed that the short wedge represented a unit of grain, possibly the ban, the most basic Sumerian measure of cereal, which was equivalent to about 6 liters of grain. According to Friberg, a unit six times larger, the bari!Ja,' was represented by a circular marking. ' 66 It appears that the shapes of the signs for grain metrology derive from tokens in the shape of cones and spheres. The small cone apparently represented a small w1it of grain in common use. Moreover, the sphere is to be understood as a second, larger, basic unit of grain. Large cones and spheres represent still larger wlits of grain metrology. According to Friberg, the large wedge, which would correspond to the large cone, was equivalent to 180 ban of barley. The wedges shmvn sideways or apex to apex were fractions of a ban. Furthermore, it appears to be meaningful that in the four instances when flat disks were included in envelopes, they were associated with small spheres 167 or with small and large spheres. 168 The association of spheres and flat disks in envelopes seems to correspond with the frequent association of deep and shallow circular impressed signs on tablets. I therefore propose the possibility that spheres, large spheres, and flat disks represent a sequence of three measures of grain corresponding respectively to such later Sumerian wlits as 1, 10, and (?) bariga. These three circular signs could correspond to ATU 897, 913, and 907. It should be assumed, however, that during prehistory, cones, spheres, and disks represented nonstandarclized measures of grain. They referred probably to containers in which the goods were traditionally handled, such as a "small basket," a "large basket," or a ~'granary." These units might be compared to such present-day infonnal measures as a "cup of sugar" and a

impressed markings he third n1illennium 1lution of cuneiform ::mns to their protoltion of pictographs such research by A. , and A. A. Vaiman, ns carried the same logical to tmst that Jkcn prototypes.

''pitcher of beer." As a result, the prehistoric units should be assumed to be entirely nonmathematical entities. Until the late fourth mille1mium B.C., a sphere cannot be considered as a precise multiple/fraction of a cone or disk. The n1easure.·.; probably did not become standardized n1etrological units before the late Uruk period or the early historical period, when their ratio was as follows:

IMPRESSED TABLETS

81

Grain measures: Sasystem, after J6ran Friberg, The Third

CEREALS

Millennium Roots of Babylonian Mathematics {G6teborg:
Chalmers University of Technology and University of G6teborg,
j

a-----o------0-----0-----v
BAN

5

6

10

3

BARIGA

978- 1979), p. 10.

(Grain(?) d wedges and circufor grain. 164 This is , Joran Friberg, and md. 165 Friberg proo, possibly the ban, equivalent to about s larger~ the bariga; at the shapes of the shape of cones and mit of grain in comsecond, larger, basic arger units of grain vhich would correbarley. The wedges

The Punched Cones and Spheres: Units ofLand Measurement(?) The Sumerian system of land measures include such lmits as the bur) efe) and iku and fractions or multiples thereof represented by circular signs and wedges, some bearing a punctation or an incision. 169 The similarity in appearance of these signs with the p1mched cones and with the notched and punched spheres suggests that these tokens may have been used to indicate units of!and. The similarity of shape between counters indicating grain and land measures may, in turn, point to a cmnmon practice in early societies of calculating land measurements in tenns of the quantity of seed necessary for sowing. 170 The tokens indicating milts ofland carmot be considered to have represented standardized measures during prehistory. It is only in the late fourth or early third millennium B.C. that they became increments of a specific ratio, as follows:

Land measures: After J6ran Friberg, The Third

LAND

Millennium Roots of Babylonian Mathe-

matics (G6teborg:

four instances when :ociated with small 1tion of spheres and j_Uent association of [ therefore propose isles represent a sectively to such later :ircular signs could

b_--D-----ITD·--o---8
IKU ESE BUR BURU

6

6

3

10

Chalmers University of Technology and University of G6teborg,
j

978- 1979), p. 46

)fy, cones, spheres, rain. They referred >nally handled, such 1ese units might be cup of sugar" and a

The Cylinders and Lenticular Disks: Units for Animal Counts(?) Joran Friberg identified a special accounting system used to keep track of animals in Elan1 that was also used in U ruk. 171 These signs consisted of a long wedge, which I propose to view as the rendering of a cylinder (type 4: 1), to represent one animal. Tlus assumption is supported by an envelope from Susa, Sb 1940, which bears three long wedges on its surface, corresponding to three cylinders held inside. m According to Friberg, the sign for ten an.i1nals was a circle, which I interpret as the graphic representation of a lenticular disk (type 3: w). This is also supported by the Susa envelope Sb 1940, which held three lenticular disks translated into three circular markings on its face. 173 If this interpre-

82

THE EVIDENCE

Animal units: After J6ran Friberg, The Third Millennium Roots of Babylonian Mathematics (G6teborg: Chalmers University of Technology and University of G6teborg,

tation is correct, the lenticular disk is a unique cxan1ple of a token expressing a group. I assume that the prototype lenticular disk 1neant a "flock." Only in the late fourth or early third millennium can the impressed circular sign be identified as standing for a precise nun1ber: "ten animals." Cylinders as well as lenticular disks, it seems, were used to count animals, with no specification of age and sex. Because sheep and goats \Verc so con1mon in Mesopotamia and Elan1, it is probable that the animals in question were mostly small livestock.

ANIMALS
~---o--x
The plain tokens, which were both the most cmnmon and the most ancient counters, stood tOr quantities of staple foods- grain and livestockand for measures ofland. They gave rise to parallel sequences of impressed signs, the first being metrological units of cereals, the second standing for numbers of animals, and the third representing area of land. The tokens/ signs of these three sequences are not often combined in a single envelope or on the same tablet. In one instance, however, lenticular disks were associated with cones in an envelope from Susa. 174 This particular account stood, perhaps, for quantities of fodder allotted to a munber of animals. In stun, the meaning of the fourth-millennium plain tokens can be extrapolated backward from the impressed signs of the fourth to the third millennia B.C. But what about the cones, spheres, disks, and cylinders extracted from the prehistoric layers of the eighth to the fifth millennia B.C.? Can one assume that they held the same significance as those of the fourth millennium? There is no way to know. The only clue they might hold is the fact that signs and symbols have a pervasive endurance which makes them withstand time in a unique fashion. This is exemplified, for example, by our symbols for numerals- r, 2, 3, etc.- which have remained practically unchanged since their inception in 700 B. c. Mter all, symbols are instituted for the purpose of communication, and any deviation- in their use would create miscommlmication and confusion. Disjunction in S)llnbolism, as argued by Terence Grieder, occurs only as a result of drastic social or environmental change. 175 No such upheaval is known to have occurred between the Neolithic and the Chalcolithic period in the Near East. On the contrary, that time is known as a cultural plateau characterized by a great stability. Another vexing proble1n concerns whether or not cones, spheres, disks, and cylinders carried the same meaning from the Mediterranean coast to the Caspian Sea. While the question cannot be answered, several arguments offer support for the idea that they did. First, it is easier to borrow than to reinvent. Second, the cones, spheres, disks, and cylinders were among the easiest shapes to make and, according to the law of least effort, represented the most common staples: grain and animals. Now, cultivated grain and

10

10

1978- 1979), p. 21.

c of a token exprcsslisk meant a ''flock." 1e impressed circular n animals." ;ed to count animals, l goats were so com. anin1als in question

dmnesticatcd animals were common throughout the entire Near East, malcing it particularly easy to borrow the system wholesale. Third, the tokens were concept signs, independent of phonetics, and could be shared by people speaking different languages. Again, tokens can be compared to our numerals, which origlluted in India and arc now used on the greatest part of the planet, standing for the same concepts ±or the innumerable people who express them in different languages.
Incised Signs

IMPRESSED TABLETS

83

on and the most anmin and livestockuences of Unpressed second standing for >fland. The tokens/ in a single envelope Lilar disks were asso; particular account unber of animals. Ln tokens can be exfourth to the third cs, and cylinders exfifth millennia B. c.? ; those of the fourth .ey might hold is the : which malces them for example, by onr tined practically unnbols are ll1stituted in their use would in symbolism, as aric social or environ:curred between the ;t. On the contrary, {a great stability. )nes, spheres, disks, :literranean coast to :i, several arguments r to borrow than to ers were among the t effort, represented :ultivated grain and

The tokens identified by pictographs likewise stood for units of merchandise, leading to the conclusion that during its entire existence the token system was an accounting device restricted to keeping track of goods. Some of the complex tokens were used to keep accounts of animals and quantities of grain. They differed from the plain tokens, however, in showing greater precision. Cylinders and lenticular disks represented so many head of livestock but the complex counters indicated the species ("fat-tailed sheep," type z: I5), the sex ("ewe," type 3' 54), and the age ("lamb," type 3' I4). The quannun jump in the number of token types and subtypes which occurred in large cities about 3500 B.c. seems to reflect a need for greater accuracy. On the other hand, most of the complex tokens found in the large centers of the fourth millennium B.C. stood for finished products, such as bread, oil, perfume, wool, and rope, and for items produced in workshops, such as metal, bracelets, types of cloth, garments, mats, pieces of furniture, tools, and a variety of stone and pottery vessels. The multiplication of token shapes in the protohistorical period, therefore, signals the addition of manufactured products to the goods accounted for in the temples. Accordingly, plain and complex tokens varied not only in their shapes, markings, and the way they were hanclled and stored but also in the types of commodities they represented. The plain tokens stood for products of the countryside, the complex ones for goods manufactured in cities.
Numerals

The invention of numerals on pictographic tablets provided a new formula to express numbers of tmits of goods. We know from the token contents of envelopes that tokens were repeated as many times as the number of items counted. "One jar of oil" was shown by one token standing for a jar of oil; "two jars of oil'' by two such tokens, "three jars of oil" by three tokens, and so on (figs. I2 and I6). This rudimentary system was replaced on pictographic tablets by numerals or signs used to express abstract numbers, such as 1, z, 3, etc. As a result, the pictographs were never repeated in a one-to-one correspondence to indicate the number of units involved, as was still the case for impressed signs. Instead, the pictographs were preceded by a numeral. For example, the sign for "jar of oil" was preceded by the sign for I, 2, 3, etc. The sign for I was a short wedge, identical to the sign for a small measure

84

THE

EVIDENCE

of grain; 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. were indicated by two, three, fOur, or five wedges; the sign for ro was a circular sign, identical to that for a larger measure of grain. In the same fashion, the sign for 6o \Vas a large wedge; f()r 6oo, a punched large wedge; and that for 3,6oo, a large circular sign. 176 It appears that the in1pressed signs, while retaining their primary meaning as grain measures, acquired a secondary meaning as nmnerals. This phenomenon of bifurcation is particularly explicit on tablets where, in the same text, identical signs are used alternately to express grain measures or numerals. Tablets recording the rations allotted to workers, for example, feature the same signs to indicate the number of workers paid and the quantities of grain they received. 177 The same is true in the Proto-Elamite system of writing. 178 Numerals created an econon1y of notation, since thirty-three jars of oil could be shown by six signs: three circles and three wedges. The importance of this bifurcation in the meaning of signs cmcially marks a cognitive departure in the quantification of goods.
THE PLACE OF IMPRESSED TABLETS IN THE EVOLUTION OF WRITING

The impressed tablets constitute the third step in the evolution from tokens to signs. They followed the stage of tokens and markings on envelopes and, in turn, were supplanted by pictography. ' The link between impressed tablets and envelopes is demonstrated by the many features they share. First, the impressed tablets adopted the same material from which envelopes were manufactured: they were modeled in clay. The tablets were also modeled in the same general shape and size as their immediate precursors. Adam Falkenstein noted that the earliest pictographic Uruk tablets were sometimes strikingly convex: perhaps they perpetuated the roundish shape of the former envelopes."' Of course, envelopes and tablets had a different structure. The envelopes were hollow, since their purpose was to hold and protect a number of tokens. As tokens carne to be eliminated, the tablets were naturally solid. The seal impressions covering the entire surface of most envelopes and tablets constitute another important similarity between the two types of artifacts. Not only were these sealings made by the same types of sealsnamely, mostly cylinders and more rarely stamp seals - bnt they also showed similar patterns carved in the same style. Featured among tl1e many motifs which occur on both types of artifacts, for example, arc temple representations and various types of vessels. 18° Furthermore, occasionally at Susa 181 as well as Uruk 182 a number of tablets and envelopes bore the impression of the same seal, attesting that the two ways of keeping records were handled by the same temple services or individuals. Most important, the signs of the impressed tablets are comparable- in form, technique, and disposition- to the signs displayed on envelopes. First, the same signs reoccur on both types of artifacts. In particular, all the markings impressed on envelopes- shott and long wedges, deep and shal-

our, or five wedges; a larger measure of ~ wedge; tOr 6oo, a ar sign. 176 It appears y 1neanmg as grain "his phenmnenon of the same text, iden~s or numerals. Tab)le, feature the same quantities of grain ystem of writing.r7s

low circles and ovals- continue unchanged in the repertory of signs on tablets. 183 The list of signs impressed on tablets, however, is longer than that of the markings on envelopes. This may be explained by the small sampling of 19 envelopes bearing markings, compared to some 240 impressed

IMPRESSED TABLETS

85

tablets. Also, by the time tablets were in usc, the scribes had already exploited further the possibilities offered by two-dimensionality, creating new

signs. Thus, they manipulated the wedge, turning it sideways (sign rd) or doubling it (sign 1e).
Second, the techniques most frequently used to in1press 1narkings on envelopes prevailed on tablets. Thus, signs were still1nade by pressing to-

irty-threc jars of oil
~es. The importance arks a cognitive de-

)lution from tokens ;son envelopes and,

kens against the clay face of the tablets, as is visibly the case on Sb 2313 (fig. 19); otherwise, it was usual to use a blunt stylus (fig. 18). Third and finally, the signs were presented on the tablets in horizontal parallel lines, following the same hierarchical order as on the envelopes. One envelope from Susa, for example, displays a line of circular signs followed by a line of wedges, in exactly the same way signs were presented on a tablet. " 4 In turn, this may reflect tl1e hierarchical order and the parallel rows in which tokens were organized by prehistoric accountants. The fimction of impressed signs and of envelope markings, however, was radically different. The discrepancy lay in the role they played vis-a-vis
the clay counters. On envelopes, for the convenience of accountants, the

is demonstrated by :s adopted the same ey were modeled in il shape and size as hat the earliest picx: perhaps they per-

markings merely repeated the information encoded in the tokens within. By the tablet stage, however, the signs had altogether replaced the tokens. The format inherited from the envelopes by tl1e impressed tablets was to enjoy a long life. Clay continued to be used to make tablets, in the same
cushion shape and bearing seal impressions, until the Christian era. 185

Also, the same disposition and hierarchical ordering of signs persisted for
centuries. 186 Even the function of the tablets remained 1nostly economic

79 Of course, enve:; were hollow, since :ns. As tokens came

throughout the ages. The technique of writing, however, evolved from crudely impressed signs to the more legible incised pictographs and would later be done witl1 a more functional triangular stylus.

i

I

nost envelopes and

n the two types of ne types of sealsils - bnt they also ed among the many Jle, arc temple rep-

xe, occasionally at

elopes bore the imof keeping records

;,

re comparable- in tyed on envelopes. :n particular, all the ges, deep and shal-

