c.t

Andy \V;arhol, SuinJ~. t96J· Synthetic polytuc:r paint and ~ilkKl'(:(n ink QU anw$. @The Andy WathoJ Fouod:uioofOf't.he Vi~ Am./,'t~ts, ~r. Phor!Y. The- Andy Warhol Fouochllon,lnc./Att Rcsoun>c,

New YOfk..

-French mdio announcement of the dc~th of Gilles Ddcuv::

'')95· philosopher Gilles DeJeuze committed suicide by throwing himself or jumping out of the window of his Paris a)'Xtrtment. We might recall some ofDeleuze's own wriringabonr rhe windo·w, rhe closed system of the fr~tme and tl1e "out-ot:6cJd· (hm-s-champ) of representational space as we ask, \~'hat '"''s the fatal lure of penetrating the spate of the wic>dow into the great beyond?' "Doors, windows, box office windo< vs. skylights, car windows. mirrors, :ore all frames;' wrote Dele\1".«: in Cine· ma z: 'The M011tmfnt-lmogt. "The great directors have particular affinities with parcicularsccondacy, tertiary etc. frames ," he continues. "And it is by this dovetaili ng of fi1unes that the parts of the set or of the closed system are separated, but also couverge and llre reunired."' The frame of the screen is a closed system, a pri1lt:u y c.ontainer for inset secondary and tertiary fromes that may recede jn mise en abyme, buc also converge to reuni te within a gt3nder but still bounded fr·ame. Yet, for Deleuze, there is always a beyond, ourside this frame, an "o\lt--of-lield; ''more "r<1 dical elsewhere." "All frami.I1g derermines >n our-of-fidei [!.>on-champ]":"]none case, d1e our-of-fielc! desjgn:nes tl1at which cxi:,-ts elsewhcre to one side or arotmd; in the other case, the out-of··ficld testifies to a more disntrbing presence, one "~uch caonor even be said to exist, but rarher ro 'insist' or 'subsist: a more radical elsewhere, outside homogeneous space and time~ In his death, Deleuze found <ius elsewhere, outside of the frame.
1 1

1N NOVEM a P.R

For the rest of us- left fJci ng the window, the frame, the screen-we might wonder: Is there a oe·w logic to vision as our windows, frames. screens are ever more. fractured and virtually multiplied? \>Vhich teduJologies will break thro ugh the frame aud have us climb through the virtual window? And which will have us stay fixed -nose to the glass (or as the French say about windowshopping, lecher lcs ·vitrincs, "to lick the windows")-in front of the windows, caught in the hold of an image, framed in display?' This book took shape while the screens of cinema, television, aud computer began to converge, gradually losing their appararical distinctions.' Now, a variety of screens- long and wide and square, large aud small, composed of grains, composed of pixels, lit by projected U ght, cathode-ray tube, plasma, Len- compete for our attention without any convincing argmneots about hegemony. Screens are "display and deUvery" fo rmats-variable in versions of projection scrt>en, TV

screen, computer screen, or hand-he.ld device. "Film" is a "stora.ge" mediumvariable in versions of video, ovns, compttter hard drive, databank, online server.

Spectators are "users" or "players~ wirh an 4 in terface"--variable in versions of
remotes, mice, keyboards, touch screens, joysticks, goggles and gloves and body suits. J ust as the chem ically based, analog images of photography have been replaced by digital images, the "cinema" has ix.'<:tL dispbced by systems of circu!arion and tmnsmission that abolish the projection screen and link the screens of the computer aud television with the dialogic iuceractivity of the r.e lephoo.e. In the ·cinematic century"-seen now in the 20/ 20 of retrospective

>·· I

'\'jsjon"-the viewer remained im.rnobile- in front of the frame-of the.screen. As we begin this new centul)i the "postcinemati~ "post-tclcvis-ual'· vie. '"'er has new
forms of ever-virtual mobili ry-n<"· speeds of access to deep hisrories of images and text, newly mobilized screelllS that travel in airplanes and automobiles, screens that c;1n be hau d-beld and wireless. As public buildings and domestic spaces boast image- bearing glass skins, as large-screen tdcvisio ns are big enough

and flat enough r.o substitute for r;eal windows, as "windows" widlin our computer screens stream images from multiple sources) as \'irtuat reality technologies
expand fro m the gaming world int<l entertainment or daily services, tbe "virtual window'' has become a ubicruitous jl<lrt:tl-a ''wormhole"-to pasts and fimtres. In 1 915, D. W. Gr·iffith imagined a 1\rture library where o ne could sit in fro nt of a "properly adjusted wi ndow" and "actually see what bappened" in the past: I magine a public library of the near future, for instance. There will be long rows ofboxe.· or pillars, properly classified aud indexed of coul'\le. At each box a push button and before eacll box a seat. Suppose you wish to "re·d up" · cerrnin episode in Napoleon's life. Instead of con-

CONC L US IO N

suiting all the authorities, wading through a host of books, and ending bewildered without a clear idea of exacdy what did happen, >·ou ·will

merely seat yourselfat a properly adjusted wimJQW ir1 a .<cier~tijica!ly prepared room, press the butto11 andachtally see what happened .. . 1'here will be no (lpiniom expreJJerl. You ":.!Jili merdy hepreunt a.t the making rfbi.uqyy.6
Griffith's prediction capwred an insight about his centus)?s "new" technology for storing time, yet he imagined a "properly adjusted window'' as ideologicaUy transpasent-he did not acknowledge any mediations to the "history picture" it would record. Alberti's fifteenth-century metaphor of the window served to frame the geometric, geophysical world, arranging the above., below, ahead, and behind on the flat fmmed plane of representation. Alberti's window was not a transparent "window on the world," but it provided us with a Renaissance root for a "windowed elsewhere"-a virtual space that exists on the virmal plane of represeomtion. In Alberti's schema, there was no absolute size, only proportions relative to the human measure: "Large, small, long, short, high, low, wide, narrow, light, dark, bright, gloomy, and everything of the kind [magmun, parvum, lcngum, hreve1altum, · inji· mum, latun1) a. 1·r.tttm, darum, ohscu.rum, !uminosum) tetubro.sum et hu£uJmorli omm1. which philosophers tcn·nerl accidents, because they may or may nor be present in rhing~. all these are such as to be known only by
cornpa.rison.""

I 243

T he screens of the twenty-first century are large, small, long, short, higb, low, wide, narrow, light, dark, bright, gloomy, artd known by their relative measure to the buman scale. And yet, as the dis;play screens of movies, television, and che computer begin to grow more similar to each other, a new logic to fr:lmed visuality rakes hold. The windo"'s metaphoric boundary is no longer the singular frame oi perspective-as beholders of nmltiple-scrcen "windows," we now see the world in spatially and tem porally fractured fumes, through "vir-

tual windows" that rely more on the multiple and simulmneous r J'Ia!l on the sin-

g.,Jar and seqttential..
T his book has engaged i.o a split optic, a historical parallax. Rcn:lli.-sauc-e pcrspecti,·e negotiated a new relation between the near and the fur, organi7.ed along the vanishjng point of a single line of vision. By analogy, this book negotiates the now and tbe then, the near and the f.u of technology refracted dtrough the foreshortened focal length of the present. In this way, J've brought 6fteentbcenrory theories of perspective, seventeenth-cenrury d> eories of optics and the mind, nineteenth-<.-entury devices <U>d visual pmct<ccs, and rwcnt<cth -century mo,<ing-image media onto the flattened plarte of the present, held next to each
Tl'l& t·u ·ruR& OF W I NDOW S

other and yet seen through s J<j,Jeidoscope of critil:'ll lenses. Descartes's window, Heidegger's fi"'ame, Bergson's virtu::tl, nnd Virilio's scree.n comhlnc to give ns an optic tlu-ough which we c:1n see these changes in modern vi..suality. Ratht~r than simply provide a technological account, they give us a philosophical and subjec·
tive sense of those change!t-and of their consequences.

Meanwhile, the llcxt generation-today's ter··year-olds-are transfLxed in front of screens full of images driven by X- Boxes or PlayStMions or G am e-

Cubes, IVith "c011troU ers" in their hands. Or they multi~·sk-doing homework 3SSignments, researching on the Web, redesigning their m y space page, while IMing with friends. T hey are living deep in their own virtually rendered clscwhcrcs,
and yet, Like the generations bef o re them, the. y sit in front of the frame of a "wiudow."Their inter:tc· tion with the snccn may be di fferent, but if it is, it makes the intt:Htsigence of the fmme a chilli11g const::~n t, one wirh ine.'(otable t.'UitunU power. Or perhaps, as films like E,,:i.<tenZ, The Matrix, and Strauge Days predict, the screen may dissolve; images and data will be "up[o,tdcd" di.retdy, byp~ss ing the eye and the optics of vision. T lus new cir· cuitry tak<. -s us beyond and through the wi ndow1 a del-enestr:(ltion that has new risks and pleasures. In r h.is vision, the "~ge of windows"- :1n.d by exre nsion, the "ge of screens-has, as H. G . Wells pre· dieted, reached its end.

<:..2 Sony Memory StKk ad. 1 999·

CONCLUS l ON

POS TL OGU E 2005
It is difficult to write ;~bout the immedi,~te of media, di.fliculr t.o analpe the pervasive present ever slipping """ ·Y· This ·book was written amid the byperspeed of technological change; it began long before our television screens began to look like websites, before our computer screens routinely contained moving images, and before movies looked like both. As time wore on and the technological Sllllpsbor of the present kept changing, 1 fou nd it necessary to add richer historical and tl> eoretical detail, taking some steps backward from the digital present to detail how the P'·st presses its nose up ag-Ainst the glass of the future. But this book was also written in an era of"posts"-the post- to modern.iry, the post- to colonialism, the post- to the millennium, the post- to 9/n-as if d> e present can be understood only as an epilogue itself, an end.iog after the end. We can know the past only in terms of how it has been constructed fo r us, in terms of how e··ideuce appears to us now, mediated through the lenses of the present. This book has tried to provide <U> account not of how we got to here, but of whe('e we~ve come from. When 1 wrote Wi11do.v Shqppiug, I wanted to 31"[\'Ue l10w deeply movingimage media had permeated our cons<:iousness, how they had changed our access ro history and to the past. ] argu·ed rhat postmodernity could be understood only as a consequence of the creeping centra1ity ol mediated modes of visuality and in terms of the virtual mobilities in everyday life. 1 offered an account of subjectivity-a temporally confused subjectivity- in the mediasaturated firs t world, a world where the commodit)' fetish set the rule of culture. But tbe ·mobili'<ed and virtual ga-<e" was not- <md iJ not- the global norm. Nor are there easy generalizations to make about consciousness itself. An individuafs relation to space and to time is mediated by a range of determinantsincluding geographical place in the w<>rld, access to media, religious belief, psychological state. Tbis book, like Windqw Shopping, attempts to provide ··~ account of the subjectivities of people in the most mediated provinces of the first wodd. 1 have been drawn to philosophies that attempt to coocepmalize the ways in which our bodies and m.inds move and think in the everyday. T he drives of tcchnophiliaL ust for efficiency, mobility, accelerated modes of experience- produce changes that are both gradual and dramatic. Yet these changes require chat we confront the sad truth of their price- a consequence that has been termed a "digital divide" but is less about the digital chan about another more deeply rent divide. AU agonistic accounts require a theory of rupture., an account of the break. T he coUa.pse of the World Trade Tow. e rs provided a dramatic visual turning

point, a break that fo rced a change in all accounts of the interdependence of global and technological change. The dlsintegration of two massive towers of glass and steel had an explosive epistemological charge. As the writer A. M . Homes recounted in tbc New Y<>rk Times: "I see the plane, and I see the plane crash into the building. I see the buildings burn, and I see the buildings fall down. I see imagery that until now did not exist in reality, ooty in the fiction of film. Seeing it with yotrr own eyes, in real time- not oo a scJ"een, not protec -ted by the fnuneof a television set, not in the communal darkness of a movie theater -seeing it like this is irreconcilable, like a hallucination, a psychotic break."' A. M. H omes w-·s unprotected by the frame or by the screen. \~1hile many wished that the images of <j/n were only a movie or television special effect, the towers of glass and steel remain only in the immaterial archive of memory and in the archive of photographs and films that retain them. The film remains after the building fades: t he ephemcrol materiality of the Twill Towers-and the lives extinguished inside them -has been imparted to the arcb.ival immateriality of photographic, filmic, and television images. In many ways, this implosive inversion of our technologies- aircraft turned into missiles against buildings on our own shores-is more and more

2·s

I

possible as iear has lost its borders. Terrorism is made possible by modern medi"-funded by a transnational credit economy, organi-zed by the decentered networks of the lntemet. Chemic:al agents can be sent through the postal system. D iseases can cross borders and refute the metaphors of quarantine. The only way to counte. r tbe rhetoric ()f fear is to dc:x::onstruct it, to teach cynicism and doubt and critical reading. Here, I've struggled to add an appropriate epilogue to this book, one written from the cusp of new realizations about how the frame fu nctions, about the coUapse of borders and boundaries, and about how mobility has changed its valence. As a book- wciter at the end of the twentieth century, I found that my writing process was facilitated-or perhaps hindered- by word- processing software that encouraged holding· each chapter open in overlapped windows, with easy "copy" and "paste" changes made without regard to lioe·r logic. Computer-assisted writing is fu rther enabled (or d isabled) by the easy switch between the deep desktop of "ofliline" appGcations and "ontine" sources with search engines and text archives available on the very same screen. T he. blank "page" is now an upright screen, but not a blank screen. It bas toolbars and desktop icons and many "windows."ln fact, one.of the inset frnrnes on my computer screen contains a little Microsoft .ma.,cot-an inset "window" chat opens to a c-artooned computer with its own belly- like screen-{! foggy blne eyeball in the socket of a monitor with feet. T llis creature taps its foo r and nods, yawns and

J>OSTLOGU:E 2005

do:r..es, sits and wiggles jts toes- an impish avatar of the computer·s solipsistic pull. Lt daily screeds, 1 fomented against the liabilities of multitasking and the toll that it " "IS .taking on my ever- more fractured subjectivity. If thefldneur and
jliineuse were models for the subject in nineteenth- and twentieth-century modemit)', the multimsker is their twenty-firs t-century heir. Despite my own wild technopbilia, I develop..> d a rc<>ctionary nostalgia for the fixity and simplic ~ ity of a single-window view.
My argument i.n rhis book largely sidesteps the new configurations of global, t.l'Msnationa.l, and borde.rless networiks, of how the border and boundaries of nation-stat£s 110 longer co11trol dte sovereignry of peoples. Glassmaking was invCilted in the sands oflVIesopot.ami-a-now l mq. fslamic research into optics was of determinant importance to all subsequent optical theory. The demateriali·t.ations made possible by solid yet transparent planes of glass take on a new significance as we look into ne.wly mediated windO\YS, with new iJtoriae.
to be seen.

1 247

J·OST LOCU f. ZOOS

