(HTTP://LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG)

REVIEWS

ESSAYS

INTERVIEWS

The Room and the Elephant by Sven Birkerts (/contributor/sven-birkerts)
On internet criticism, Wikipedia, and the waning of expertise.
June 7th, 2011
Illustration: M.C.Escher, Man With Cuboid (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M._C._Escher)

N E WSLE TTE R search (http://lareviewofbooks.us2.listmanage.com/subscribe? S H AR E ART ICL E u=f16bfce41c64ef769044f47ed&id=8d082
ADD TO MY LARB

GE T O UR WE E KLY

ABOUT LARB MEMBERSHIP (HTTP://LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG/ABOUT-

EVERY SO OFTEN SOMETHING will break through the stimulus shield I hold up whenever I go online, which I do far too often these days, we all BOOK CLUB (HTTP://LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG/MEMBERSHIP/) LARB/) do, and for various reasons, one being, I'm sure, that the existence of the BLOG (HTTP://LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG/TOMSmedium has created an unremitting low-intensity neural disquiet that we TAG G E D AUT H OR S feel only the medium can allay -- even though it cannot, never has. But it is AUTHORS (HTTP://BLOG.LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG/) BOOK-CLUB/) Maria Bustillos (/author/maria-bustillos), an attribute of the Internet to activate in me, and maybe in all its users, a CONTRIBUTORS Sven Birkerts (/author/sven-birkerts), (HTTP://LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG/ABOUTpersistent sense of deferred expectancy, as if that thing that I might be Marshall McLuhan (/author/marshallGENRES mcluhan) (HTTP://LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG/ABOUTLARB/AUTHORS/) looking for, that I couldn't name but would know if I saw, were at every (HTTP://LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG/ABOUTmoment a finger tap away. That is the root of the addiction right there -- LARB/CONTRIBUTORS/) TAG G E D BOOKS and it is an addiction, sure, if only a lower-case one. To bear all this, LARB/GENRES/) therefore, to proof myself against the unstanchable flow of unnecessary Understanding Media (http://lareviewofbooks.org/search/? information and peripheral sensation, I make use of this shield, which is book_id=71176), Dorkismo: The Macho of really just an attention-averting reflex, a way of filtering almost everything the Dork away, leaving just the barest bones of whatever I happen to be looking at, (http://lareviewofbooks.org/search/? book_id=71175) and these only in case some tell-tale name or expression requires me to peer a bit more closely. I practice this defensive, exclusionary scanning not only with the incidental flotsam I encounter -- the inescapable digests of happenings in the world, celebrity divorces, killer storms, and so on -- but also, more and more, with texts about subjects that ostensibly concern me. A recent case in point -- I have it handy now because I finally printed it out -- is an article I found online at The Awl (http://www.theawl.com/) called "Wikipedia and the Death of the Expert" by Maria Bustillos (http://www.theawl.com/2011/05/wikipedia-and-the-death-of-theexpert) (posted on May 17, 2011). It came to me via several clicks at one of the so-called "aggregate" sites I sometimes visit to keep myself "informed." I scan a great many articles in the course of my daily tours, but I am not avid. More often I scroll my eyes down the screen with a preemptive weariness -- which is an angry and defensive posture, I agree -- as if nothing truly worthy could ever be found online (I know this is not true), as if I will have conceded something to the opposition if I were to fully engage the Internet and profit from the engagement.

Share Share Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.p 4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng US&s=google_plusone_share&url=http%3 elephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20an //52e54a0b98483599/8&frommenu=1&u Share Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.p 4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng US&s=reddit&url=http%3A%2F%2Flarev elephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20an 4f2333904b9c0022/-//52e54a0b98483599/9&frommenu=1&u Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.p 4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng US&s=tumblr&url=http%3A%2F%2Flare elephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20an //52e54a0b98483599/10&frommenu=1& Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.p 4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng US&s=digg&url=http%3A%2F%2Flarevie elephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20an //52e54a0b98483599/11&frommenu=1& Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.p 4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng US&s=stumbleupon&url=http%3A%2F% elephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20an //52e54a0b98483599/12&frommenu=1& Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.p 4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng US&s=delicious&url=http%3A%2F%2Fla elephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20an //52e54a0b98483599/13&frommenu=1& (http://lareviewofbooks.org/feed/? ver=2) EMAIL
 JUMP TO COMMENTS

WELCOME GUEST

REGISTER (HTTP://LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG/LOG LOGIN (HTTP://LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG/LOGIN

¤ Reading online is, we know, a keyword-driven process, and the reader (this reader) has to exert near-constant mental counter-pressure -- drive with his foot on the brakes, as it were -- if he is to read words on screen in the way that he once, when younger and more assiduous, read words in books. The editors of Bustillos' article clearly understood this, and so, instead of engineering anything that would work as a speed-bump, they laid the piece out for us fast-lane drivers, with short paragraphs and a way of linkhighlighting whatever sense-nuggets appeared, so that one could either click and delve, or hasten forward. For instance, a reference to the journal Naturedid not merely underline that one word, but also the phrase beside it -- Nature stood by its methods and results -- so that the eye almost irresistibly vaulted to the next nearby link, giving, at least in the opening pages, a choppy précis of what the writer was saying. Gist: Wikipedia is the one-stop reference du jour, an excellent tool, well-supervised, accountable, offering three main advantages over the print "ancestors," these being --

GO TO ARCHIVE (HTTP://LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG

R E COM M E N D E D

(/review/an-invitationto-forgetting)

(/review/the-right-fitnicholas-de-monchauxsspacesuit-fashioning-

and on she went at bullet speed. After this, however, there comes an easing of the incessant hyperlinking and a sense that the main discussion is being engaged, which is good for Bustillos, as my lateral propulsion had me all but lifting off the page. The Wikipedia pitch was obvious enough, but now it appears that more than the efficacy of Wikipedia is at issue. With minimal transition, Bustillos introduces cyber-theorist Bob Stein, identified as the founder and codirector of the Institute for the Future of the Book (http://www.futureofthebook.org/), who then serves a kind of emcee function, invoking Marshall McLuhan as the thinker to reckon with on the question of digital collaboration. All sorts of potential links have been left unhighlighted, and I find myself decelerating, getting more engaged. Marshall McLuhan. Here is the old master, the original media pundit, whose name I can never encounter without flashing back fifty years to dinner parties my parents hosted. I would eavesdrop: all this talk about the "global village" and "the medium is the message." I remember the vibration in the air -- this was something new, this had people going. Now Bustillos has Stein recalling McLuhan, adapting him to his particular purpose -- or is it Bustillos adapting Stein? -- working the article to build toward his dramatic assertion, which I will get to, which I want to put across as the culmination it was, it being the sentence that lanced through my screen and got me so agitated. But there is something like a world-view that needs to be set out first. Once McLuhan has been introduced, Bustillos enlarges the field of action, quoting the man from his 1969 Playboy interview:

apollo)

(/essay/impersonatingourselves) (/essay/thepump-youpump-thewater-from)

(/essay/the-death-ofthe-book) (/essay/lifein-storageofcapitalismand-aesstorage-wars)

The computer [thus] holds out the promise of a technologically engendered state of universal understanding and unity, a state of absorption in the Logos that could knit mankind into one family and create a perpetuity of harmony and peace.

I can't but feel some dissonance here. How not? I'm reading these words in May of 2011, when it takes the fingers of both hands to count up the world's conflicts and hot spots of dissent, sites where "understanding and unity" have completely collapsed. But this is not the real point. And because the topic is, nominally, Wikipedia, and because Bob Stein has been brought in to raise the stakes, and because there is a technological vision being put forward that can no longer be discounted, I read. I can ignore the harmony and peace part of the formulation, but the other, the idea that we are being almost irresistibly gathered into a "technologically engendered state,"that has a renewed heat. This "state," for me, is the issue, the situation, and the crisis, and something about this casually strung-together article -- its references, assumptions and attitudes -- incites me in ways that other, possibly more reasoned and articulate presentations have not done. Having claimed McLuhan for her side (the sides originally set up as Wikipedia versus Brittanica), Bustillos moves to take on the idea of the expert, and, implicitly, authority itself. She starts by referencing McLuhan's years at Cambridge, when he was studying to be a literary critic (!), how he fell under the influence of the New Critics. "Before these rationalists came on the scene," she writes, "literary criticism had a mystical character rooted in the Romantic ideas of guys like Walter Pater..." That "guys" says a great deal about the status of that cultural legacy for Bustillos (or else about me and my sensitivity to insult). But this is not her point. Her point is that McLuhan, through his exposure to the "English Department renegade" F. R. Leavis, "developed the beginnings of the life-long distaste for 'expertise' and 'authority' that would come to characterize his work." Keeping in mind that this is an article promoting Wikipedia not only as the new authority-less authoritative reference source, but as the paradigm of the rapidly changing way of things, the McLuhan invocation makes more

sense. After sketching in McLuhan's early development as a media theorist, his recognition about how technologies alter the structure of our thinking, and the powerful influence on his thought of Canadian thinker Harold Innis, who was known less for his reasoned argumentation than for offering his reader a kind of mosaic of facts, perspectives and surmises, Bustillos proposes that the various elements of McLuhan's approach,

the abandonment of "point of view," the willingness to consider the present with the same urgency as the past, the borrowing "of wit and wisdom from any man who is capable of lending us either," the desire to understand the mechanisms by which we are made to understand -- are also cornerstones of intellectual innovation in the Internet age.

She then asks and simultaneously asserts "How neatly does this dovetail into a subtle and surprising new appreciation of the communal knowledgemaking at Wikipedia?!" McLuhan, so long mothballed as a Founding Father, has been re-purposed as the patron saint of this anti-expert "communal knowledge-making."

¤ At this point Bustillos makes an abrupt shift of focus. She brings her lens to rest on a contemporary media thinker, Jaron Lanier, and his recent critique of what he calls "the hive mind," which is in essence the collective process she has been celebrating. Lanier, in his important 2006 article "Digital Maoism," and much more recently in his book-length manifestoYou Are Not a Gadget, has stood up for both individuality and authorship. I had not, until recently, been aware that these were demon-concepts. But in some quarters they clearly are. Of his position, Bustillos quips: "...reading his stuff is like watching a guy lose his shirt at the roulette wheel and still he keeps putting everything on the same number." Here I am far less interested in Bustillos' reasoning, which is mainly that of the leap-frogging enthusiast, than I am in the assumptive tone, the manner, the confidence. It is a tone we often hear in the voices of those who believe their historical moment has come. It dares a mocking intonation, a casual dismissiveness: Pater is a "guy" and Lanier, standing up for individuality and authorship, well, he too is a "guy." I would not fasten so readily on Bustillos' breezily casual mode if it did not seem to be, beyond a baiting tactic, a harbinger of new attitudes. How better to get after any stance or idea than by first de-dignifying its proponents? Tolstoy -- who cyber-agitator Clay Shirkey dismissed as unreadable two years ago -- becomes the guy who wrote all those long battle scenes, Michelangelo the guy who painted all those great abs on people... But here the man under attack is one who has ventured to question the ultimate value of Internet group-think, and who has the temerity to speak for the importance of the individual subject. Why does she choose Lanier? Because he has for years been a Silicon Valley insider, one of its central thinkers, and heretical assertions like his -- from within the fold -- cannot be countenanced. The speed with which various bedrock human assumptions -- the value of the individual self, e.g. -- are lapel-flicked away I find breathtaking. Bustillos finds it "difficult to see how Lanier ... will be able to keep this sort of thing up for much longer. Michael Agger took Lanier's book to ribbons in Slate: '[Lanier's] critique is ultimately just a particular brand of snobbery. [He] is a Romantic snob. He believes in individual genius and creativity...'" Again, we need to note which terms are being tagged derisively. Bustillos is not done. She now again quotes Bob Stein, this time his review of Lanier's "Digital Maoism" article:

At its core, Jaron's piece defends the traditional role of the individual author, particularly the hierarchy that renders readers as passive recipients of an author's wisdom. Jaron is fundamentally resistant to the new emerging sense of the author as moderator -- someone able to marshal "the wisdom of the network."

The author rushes in behind Stein: "Events have long ago overtaken the small matter of 'the independent author,'" she writes. "The question that counts now is: the line between author and reader is blurring, whether we like it or not." I can't quite parse out the question there, but I see that Bustillos believes that the traditional place of the author is being superseded. In the world according to 2.0, these are deemed to be some of the big changes of our moment. Expertise, authorship, individual creativity: out. Team collaborations, Wikipedia: in. Inevitably: "Knowledge is growing more broadly and immediately participatory and collaborative by the moment." And now I come to it, without as much of a drum roll as I'd hoped, the last word, the formulation that penetrated my stimulus screen. Bob Stein gets the last important words, but what an epigram they make. Simply: "The sadness of our age is characterized by the shackles of individualism." I leave a space here -- a moment in which to re-read and ponder those words.

¤ It may seem odd that I've spent so much time summarizing and quoting from a web-posted pro-Wikipedia polemic, but this piece struck me, got down under my skin more irritatingly than most, and I needed to understand why. I think I do now. Here, in one place, I find not only a number of the issues I have been worrying for some time, but also, as I've suggested, some of the attitudes and assumptions that inform the situation, compose the climate in which the transformations are taking place. This "climate" has been the hardest thing to isolate for reflection, for it is a totality, an environment, a cultural Zeitgeist. I have tagged it for myself with a re-phrasing of the outworn idiom. "What if the elephant in the room," I ask, "is the room itself?" Reading Bustillos' article was the closest I've come to identifying that vast intangible for myself. It was there, as much in her definitional jockeying, her style of differentiating between worldviews, as in the thematic implication of the ideas themselves. Reading it, I thought: here are the pieces I need. "Wikipedia and the Death of the Expert." The title is as good a place to begin as any other. I note the immediate polarization of concepts -- Wikipedia and expert -- and the arresting announcement of the death of the latter. And though Bustillos does not establish causality -- she has not called it "How Wikipedia killed the expert" -- some of that implication inevitably attaches. "The king died and then the queen died is a story," wrote E.M. Forster in his well-known distinction between a story and a plot. "The king died, and then the queen died of grief is a plot." What Bustillos' title offers as a story, is, for me, a plot. A causal narrative. Whatever term we decide on, it is a serious matter, one that fills me with some of the queen's grief. Let me address the main business straight on. Big as the Wikipedia question is -- the question of the collaborative production of information -- there are deeper issues still, issues for which Wikipedia versus Britannica, Bustillos's comparative point of departure, is only the outer sign. And indeed, Wikipedia versus Britannica is not really even a viable polarization. After all, both are, though in clearly differing ways, collectivized enterprises looking to deliver accessible expertise to users. Bustillos's real agenda, which she gets at by way of issues of said expertise and of collaboration, is to lay out two diametrically opposed conceptions of the human and then, in

effect, to cast her vote. Here we have the split, the road-fork issuing in two paths that would with every step take the pilgrim on one further from his counterpart on the other. There is no eventual convergence. The one is the path -- the ideal -- of the individualized self, the other is the path of the socially and neurally collectivized self, along which, at some undetermined point, the idea of "self" itself must blur away, become a term no longer applicable. There have been various iterations of this latter idea, starting perhaps with theologian Teilhard de Chardin's spiritualized imagining that there will one day exist what he called a noosphere, a kind of rapture belt of merged human identity girdling the planet. Then there was Forster's prescient depiction, in his story "The Machine Stops," of a world of beings living in isolated cells, interconnected by a communications network that is uncannily like the Internet. And, much more recently, we have media theorist Kevin Kelly's variously expressed ideas about the "hive," a world in which the electronic connections between people have fused to become a quasi-nervous system, bringing about a kind of cognitive collectivism. It was Kelly, too, who has been most vigorous in advancing the idea of the universalized book: all the world's texts and data scanned into one vast keyword-searchable database. Kelly was most certainly the thinker Lanier had in mind when he spoke out against the dangers of the hive mentality. As he put it in "Digital Maoism": "the hive mind is for the most part stupid and boring." And: "The beauty of the Internet is that it connects people. The value is in the other people. If we start to believe that the Internet is itself an entity that has something to say, we're devaluing those people and making ourselves into idiots." Kant this is not, granted, but Bustillos exhibits nothing but sneering contempt for the expression, responding: "I guess if we started to believe that the Internet itself were writing Wikipedia we would be in some trouble, or maybe we would be Rod Serling, I don't know."

¤ Electronic collectivism has very quickly gone from being a sci-fi imagining to being a plausible scenario that more and more people, at least those active in the computer-culture, would endorse for us all. It will be objected that the ambitions of the cyber-sector don't have that much to do with the life of the culture at large. But one could similarly say that the decisions made by a few thousand members of the investment banking community don't affect us either. In fact, there is a connection between the ideas held by that minority and the lives that the rest of us live. The connection is technology, and McLuhan framed it early on:

It is not only our material environment that is transformed by our machinery. We take our technology into the deepest recesses of our souls. Our view of reality, our structures of meaning, our sense of identity -- all are touched and transformed by the technologies which we have allowed to mediate between ourselves and the world. We create machines in our own image and they, in turn, recreate us in theirs.

The sage of Toronto, quoted by Bustillos, encapsulates a great deal here, and it is exactly to the point. The cyber-sector, numerically a minority, could be said in important ways to have a majority voting interest so far as the development, promotion and implementation of technology goes. These are the engineers and marketers behind the enormously influential Itechnologies, all of the daily-more-sophisticated screen devices that have come to seem indispensable to people the world over -- from cell phones to tablets to reading devices of all descriptions. Backed by huge corporate interests, marketed through the global media, these interactive devices (and their consumer images) exert massive collective -- and collectivizing -- effects, and for the very reasons McLuhan hypothesized. We use them in prescribed ways and they determine not just our obvious external reflexes,

our ways of doing business, but they also seep into our deeper selves, what McLuhan quite surprisingly calls our "souls." And in this way, without even officially signing on to hive-oriented behavior and thinking, we begin to manifest it. The point is that these technologies are not used in instrumentally isolated ways. Rather, they create a community of users and a complexly selfreinforcing culture of expectations. This culture, this environment -- how well we know it -- becomes ever more difficult to step away from; and it has various socially coercive implications. Consider the obvious case in point: the cell phone in its current incarnation. What was at point of origin a distinct-use, one-to-one voice-transmitting device has become a mindboggling locus of seemingly indispensable functions, allowing multiple lines of connection between users, giving access to the great data-stream of the Internet, and subtly and not-so-subtly creating new expectations, like that of reachability, of locatability. To own a cell phone is to register yourself in the family of all users; it is to take your place in a network of indeterminate complexity, announcing, in effect, that you are in technological "range" 24/7. Hardly 1984, I agree. But it's worth considering the ways in which we are conditioned by our systems interactions. The cell phone is only one such system, the Internet is another, and the economy, as we enter it through our credit-cards and ATM transactions, is a third. These are just salient instances. Each of these systems, though we rarely think of it this way, yields itself to us by way of numbers and codes; and each by way of other codes dictates the sequence of our actions, the levels of access we are allowed, and whether or not it will function for us, or not. Letters, numbers, codes -- the new coins of the realm. Of course there are effects and consequences. Engaging these systems, we learn right away that the codes and numbers -- our identity proxies -- facilitate our movement through the electronic slipstream. We don't really believe that we become some string of digits or password; we accept this as part of how the system works, just as we accepted long ago our personal all-purpose social security number. Possibly, though, we have noticed that the more we transact our activities via Internet circuits, the less we ever interact with a person, even electronically. Almost all "situations," be they purchases, reservations, account inquiries, trouble-shooting needs, or whatever, are dealt with by our filling in mandatory fields, delivering data and, again, codes. And, of course, every such delivery of data further adumbrates one's virtual profile -- describes more precisely one's preferences, habits, and ailments, so that, as users of the Internet (and this is old news) we are addressed ever more often, and with more honed-in specificity, by way of this pseudopersonhood. How many times daily am I now addressed as "Dear Sven" by software programs behind which, I am certain, no intending individual lurks? This is all such a familiar scenario, much of it long ago imagined for us -- and thereby, curiously, not intensified but defanged -- by various anxious dystopian intellects. So that instead of worrying, "Oh dear, we were warned of a Brave New World by Aldous Huxley," we will tune into more or less the same scenario served up as spoof on a cable channel, and say, "Well, if television thinks this is a laugh ..." Never mind that television thinks almost everything is a laugh and in the space of a 24-hour news cycle can turn most any crisis or catastrophe into skit material or, in the adjacent gaming world, into a first-person shooter program. How do we cope with this growing alienation, this intensifying dissociation from what was formerly the human sphere? Human nature, like Nature itself, abhors a vacuum -- so quite understandably we respond by reaching more avidly toward the people we know, or at least have some proxy contact with, and -- here's the rub -- we often do so by way of the screen. Thus we deepen and extend the circuits.

¤ Obviously I'm speaking in vastly generalized hypothetical terms, trying to get a bead on what I am calling "the room that is itself the elephant in the room." Maybe I should say a bit more about that little koan-like formulation. What I am getting at is my sense that the biggest

transformation that has befallen us -- that we have ourselves helped bring about -- is so total in its nature, and so driven by unseen elements (circuits and signals), that we have no point of purchase for talking about it, and therefore don't; or else, no less distressingly, we imagine that because we cannot see it, cannot put a finger directly on it, nothing much has changed, and that we are still moving about in the status quo ante. (Or status quo elephante.) An elephant should be identifiable, even if it is by way of its various isolated attributes, as happens in the famous cartoon with the group of blindfolded men. One of these is the change in the status of the "expert." Bustillos argues that knowledge, and the presentation of knowledge -- its argumentation -- is shifting away from the hierarchical and analytic mode, and becoming more and more an open field of discrete elements, which can be searched and assembled according to need and use. She harkens to the modernists, to McLuhan and his mentor Harold Innis, and ends up espousing the Wikipedia model, a group-generated assemblage that can be updated and modified at any time. From the vantage of the Wikipedia project, the idea of the lone individual -- thinker, scholar -- is quixotic at best, readily mocked as a hubristic hold-over from a bygone era, as "old school." There's no question that the world is much changed. If the exceptional scholar could once hold great quantities of the world's information comprehensively in mind, she does so with less and less ease and confidence today. The computer, meanwhile, has enabled new levels of interactive collaboration, and Wikipedia is one calling card. But to suggest from that instance that the era of individual initiative in all fields has passed, that the notion of expertise has become laughable -- well, this is another of those intellectual climate-transformations, those Zeitgeist effects, that I'm talking about here. Bustillos seems to be not so much advancing her own argument here as giving voice to assumptions now abroad in the land, at least certain zip code areas of it. Her assertion is tinted with, if not yet saturated by, the collectivist premise by which the private self is an outmoded concept, perhaps elitist, threateningly counter-collective. In this vision, to quote Bob Stein again, "the sadness of our age is characterized by the shackles of individualism." What has happened? Let's not forget that we were all very recently immersed in the opposite, in the culture of self-actualization. The period leading up to the millennium was, among other things, the Therapeutic Age, millions of us bent on finding and empowering the sovereign "I." It can't be that in a few short years we flipped from heads to tails. One could make the argument that even as actualization fever carried the day, the cyber-grid was being assembled, its new procedures gaining ground, and that the implications, though latent, were registered. One could even argue, granting that that latency was broadly intuited, that the great push toward "self' was to some degree exacerbated by the specter of mass existence, and represented a preemptive surge. Possibly it was not preemptive enough. About forces and effects so widespread and inchoate we can only speculate.

¤ Though there are any number of shifts and transformations to be reckoned, all having to do with why the room feels so very different, I will have to let the some stand for the many. But one more element, no less significant, needs to be discussed. It was not a part of Bustillos' broad strokes picture, but I will make it part of mine. I mean the arrival of the "cloud," that epic new development in computing. We hear about cloud computing everywhere these days. It represents the next great leap forward. Premised on a dispersed systems network, cloud computing liberates digital material from hard-drive transmission and creates a free-floating collectively-accessible data saturation. Among other things, this digital saturation hastens the across-the-board obsolescence of a whole class of physical item. We are all witnessing the sudden dematerialization of our arts and entertainment, their transfer from unique

artifact source to universally on-demand screen availability. Walk down Main Street. The video and DVD emporia are gone -- it happened in a year or two. The bookstores, if not yet folded, are quickly going the way of record stores. More and more people are persuaded to access their culture through screen portals, ordering up what they need for their Kindle, their iPod, their nightly watching pleasures. And the middle men, the algorithmically nimble purveyors of books and music and film, increasingly access them -- us -- identifying what they think we want and laying it on our electronic doorstep. Of course there are advantages to all this. Instant access and narrowcasting to gratify our preferences. But there are enormous losses, too. The main one, front and center, call it another pachyderm, is the public and private disappearance of the physical evidence of our tastes and desires. There will be no records or CDs on the shelves of the future, few if any books. Everything will live in bits, in files -- and how can this not modify the general atmosphere? We are removing the physical markers of culture from our collective midst. For a record store was not just a place to get records, as a bookstore was not only for finding the needed read. These were sites where the love of music and literature announced themselves across a spectrum of tastes. And though they were commercial entities, these emporia also symbolized the presence, the value, of their product to the community. What distresses me about the transfer from thing to cloud -- it was Karl Marx who lamented that "all that's solid melts into air" -- is not just the loss of the object, the fetish, the thing, but also the larger thematic implications. Of course we will never dispense with physicality altogether: even the characters in Forster's extreme parable had bodies that lived in cell-like structures. But the primal materiality that governed the terms of existence is being by degrees, quick degrees, put at a distance. In his book The End of Nature, Bill McKibben argued with some persuasiveness that we have tamed nature and domesticated the idea of it. Nature is now for vacations or high-priced adventurings; or else it is, for the fortunate majority of us, a catastrophe spectacle, something else for the AOL home page slide show: tsunami, tornado, calving iceberg. We might try on the big picture for a moment, imagining the terms of physical existence as they were a hundred years ago for the average person, and comparing these with the present. I won't itemize, though I could. The short version is that the world, its elements, its nouns, has receded, as has its intractability, the defining obstacles of time and space. It's almost as if world and screen were in inverse relation, the former fading as the latter keeps gaining in reach, in definition, in its power to compel our attention. Everything about the "room" has changed, and this fact is what makes it so hard to speak of the room. There is also the vital and vexing question: are collaborative, collectivized ways of living entirely at odds with subjectivized ones? Doesn't it make sense to imagine a world where we use systems and circuits to do what they do best and indulge our clamoring selfhood in our ever-more-abundant spare time? It sounds good: The Jetsons meets Abraham Maslow. But, alas, it also sounds like a version of the old "it's just a tool" argument. Maybe things could work that way if our electronic living were not the saturation that it is fast becoming. But if we grant McLuhan's point, that we "take our technology into the deepest recesses of our souls," and that our "view of reality, our structures of meaning, our sense of identity -- all are touched and transformed ..." then we cannot find easy comfort in the both/and perspective. We need to voice and then address the if. If it is so -- if via its almost irresistible systems and skillfully marketed product ideologies, combined with shrinking available venues for private initiative and a broad-based acceptance of the idea that there is nothing at all unnatural about human beings living in steady self-reinforcing electronic milieus -- if this is what we are steering toward, preening ourselves as we quash dissent with ridicule, taking lightly the human outcomes -- what then?

¤ This is obviously a fear phrasing itself as an unanswerable question. It marks the place I had thought to stop, except that I now feel a nagging sense of incompleteness -- structurally, if not metaphysically. I did, after all, introduce the image of the diverging paths, one of which I claimed was moving so ominously toward collectivized, dematerialized screen living. What about the other? It's somehow not enough just to say that the other is the abandoned way, some pre-digital place of living where we might have remained, but didn't. The deeper issue is more whether there is still a choice, and, if so, what that might be, and how would a person live it through? This, I would say, is the vexation of life these days, and has been for some years. How to make room for the private self, how to defend its admittedly intangible claims in the face of so much change? I have no one thought in response, but many. But I will stay with my most recent contemplation. This derives in part from Rainer Maria Rilke, from his Duino Elegies, which I picked up again the other day with the feeling that there was something there I wanted. And there was. I don't think I could deliver a summary explanation of the Elegies here. Packed with thought and spirit matter, Rilke's ten long poems take on the biggest human questions, often proceeding via what feel like obsessive digressions about love, death, self-making; if any writer has put the existential self at the core of his work, it is this poet. And if there is a 180degree reversal of the human picture Bustillos presents, Rilke is its herald. Rilke's watchword, the driving concept of the elegies, is transformation. He sees our tenancy on earth as fragile; he registers an anxiety which, though it predates the information age, is uncannily like the anxiety many of us live with every day. But where the impulse of our age is clearly toward instrumental mastery, toward what is, in effect, the invention of a parallel realm in which we all collaborate and, perhaps, move toward some kind of social merging, he offers up the difficult other course. Instead of turning from the demands imposed on individual being -- which is to say, at root, solitary being -- he urges fronting that world, taking it in, suffering it, and in the process, though with no guarantee of success, transforming it. This idea, akin to Keats' notion of "soul-making," is the gist of his great ninth Elegy. The language is at once mystical and intimate. Posing the question "why / have to be human, and, shunning Destiny, / long for Destiny?" he responds:

...because being here amounts to so much, because all this Here and Now, so fleeting, seems to require us and strangely concern us. Us the most fleeting of all. Just once, everything, only for once. Once and no more. And we, too, once. And never again. But this having been once, though only once, having been once on earth -- can it ever be cancelled?

-- (tr. J.B Leishman and Stephen Spender)

The turn here, the vital moment, is in Rilke's saying that it is the world that needs us. What ever can he mean? It is almost as if existence were in some way a collusion between levels of animate being, our consciousness and the very different sentience of what he calls the creature world, of Nature -- as if our philosophical and psychological and spiritual purpose were to bringthat world into consciousness, raise it. But not collectively, into a noosphere, and not digitally, into a cloud of data, but subjectively, inwardly, into language. Some lines further, in one of the famous passages from this Elegy, he asks:

Are we, perhaps, here just for saying: House, Bridge, Fountain, Gate, Jug, Olive tree, Window, -- possibly: Pillar, Tower? ... but for saying, remember, oh, for such saying as never the things themselves hoped so intensely to be.

And:

Earth, isn't this what you want: an invisible re-arising in us? Is it not your dream to be one day invisible? Earth! Invisible!

We could not be further from Bustillos and her advocacy not just of Wikipedia, but what she sees as our newly ascendant mode of living -- and yet, yet, there is something both "visions" invoke, though in very different ways. This is the transformation of the old material given, the world, our natural origin. The digital path would move us away by building a new world, with new human rules, and placing it squarely atop the old. Rilke, speaking out of his age, drawing on his Nietzsche, Rodin, Cezanne, his genius influences, asks that we take the world in, swallow it in our living, and then labor to spin it into the stuff of a higher awareness. Both scenarios, I know this, sound bizarre, radically dissociated from the life of the moment any of us are likely to be in. Asked whether he believed that objects only existed when perceived, Samuel Johnson famously kicked a large stone and said: "I refute it thus." So we sit with our cup with its damp tea bag, our hatched-over day care schedule, wincing from the paper cut we just administered to ourselves, and we deem our living a clear refutation of both hive-life and transcendent subjectivity. But don't we also know other moods, other mind-states, occasions when it strikes us that the world is indeed changing, and changing in ways that escape our easy reckoning, but which sometimes waken in us, depending on the day, depending on our nature, either bursts of quiet exaltation, or else premonitions of some deeper dread?

Recommended Reads An Invitation to Forgetting (/review/an-invitation-to-forgetting) The Right Fit: Nicholas de Monchaux's "Spacesuit: Fashioning Apollo" (/review/the-right-fit-nicholas-de-monchauxs-spacesuitfashioning-apollo) Impersonating Ourselves (/essay/impersonating-ourselves) The Pump You Pump the Water From (/essay/the-pump-youpump-the-water-from) The Death of the Book (/essay/the-death-of-the-book) Life in Storage: Of Capitalism and A&E's "Storage Wars" (/essay/life-in-storage-of-capitalism-and-aes-storage-wars)

PRINT (HTTP://LAREVIEWOFBOOKS.ORG/ESSAY/THE-ROOM-AND-THEELEPHANT/?PRINT=1&FULLTEXT=1) Share Share Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=300&winname=addthis&pub=xa4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng=enUS&s=google_plusone_share&url=http%3A%2F%2Flareviewofbooks.org%2Fessay%2Fthe-room-and-theelephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20and%20the%20Elephant&ate=AT-xa-4f2333904b9c0022/-//52e54a0b98483599/2&frommenu=1&uid=52e54a0b75180b84&ct=1&tt=0&captcha_provider=nucaptcha) Share Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=300&winname=addthis&pub=xa4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng=enUS&s=reddit&url=http%3A%2F%2Flareviewofbooks.org%2Fessay%2Fthe-room-and-theelephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20and%20the%20Elephant&ate=AT-xa-4f2333904b9c0022/-//52e54a0b98483599/3&frommenu=1&uid=52e54a0bce4a6be8&ct=1&tt=0&captcha_provider=nucaptcha) Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=300&winname=addthis&pub=xa4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng=enUS&s=tumblr&url=http%3A%2F%2Flareviewofbooks.org%2Fessay%2Fthe-room-and-the-

elephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20and%20the%20Elephant&ate=AT-xa-4f2333904b9c0022/-//52e54a0b98483599/4&frommenu=1&uid=52e54a0b3a8d88a7&ct=1&tt=0&captcha_provider=nucaptcha) Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=300&winname=addthis&pub=xa4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng=enUS&s=digg&url=http%3A%2F%2Flareviewofbooks.org%2Fessay%2Fthe-room-and-theelephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20and%20the%20Elephant&ate=AT-xa-4f2333904b9c0022/-//52e54a0b98483599/5&frommenu=1&uid=52e54a0b4e6a1543&ct=1&tt=0&captcha_provider=nucaptcha) Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=300&winname=addthis&pub=xa4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng=enUS&s=stumbleupon&url=http%3A%2F%2Flareviewofbooks.org%2Fessay%2Fthe-room-and-theelephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20and%20the%20Elephant&ate=AT-xa-4f2333904b9c0022/-//52e54a0b98483599/6&frommenu=1&uid=52e54a0b5dbdf591&ct=1&tt=0&captcha_provider=nucaptcha) Share (http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=300&winname=addthis&pub=xa4f2333904b9c0022&source=tbx-300&lng=enUS&s=delicious&url=http%3A%2F%2Flareviewofbooks.org%2Fessay%2Fthe-room-and-theelephant%2F&title=The%20Room%20and%20the%20Elephant&ate=AT-xa-4f2333904b9c0022/-//52e54a0b98483599/7&frommenu=1&uid=52e54a0b36b79477&ct=1&tt=0&captcha_provider=nucaptcha) EMAIL (http://lareviewofbooks.org/feed/? ver=2)
COM M E N TS

2
 comments Join the discussion...
Best Los
 Angeles
 Review
 of
 Books Share
  
 Login

0

John
 Cowan

·

5 months ago

"Inescapable digests" "A keyword-driven process"? Rubbish. I have no trouble escaping these digests, and I have no magic powers you don't have, just a better idea of what I would like to read and what I wouldn't. I don't jump from link to link either: I read what's there, and maybe click on a link if I think it might give interesting elaboration to what I've read, not really different from reading an endnote in a book (if anything, footnotes are more prominent than links, because there they are, right at the bottom of the page). In short, you sound like someone who's reading what he has no interest in because he thinks it would be good for him in some undefined way. That's just a silly thing to do. Give it up and go read quod condelectari  tibi, whether in a codex or on a screen. Or else go outside and attend to "tongues in trees, books in the running brooks / Sermons in stones, and good in everything", and then come back with new eyes.
· Reply · Share >

rashedahbed

·

a year ago

Too much interesting. Want more something like this. I like it very much.
· Reply · Share >

Subscribe

Add
 Disqus
 to
 your
 site

© 2014 Los Angeles Review of Books | All Rights Reserved | Donate (https://advancementservices.ucr.edu/LosAngelesReviewOfBookGivingForm.aspx) | Contact Us (http://lareviewofbooks.org/about-larb/#contact) AngelesReviewofBooksLARB/224105870934491)

(http://www.facebook.com/pages/Los(https://twitter.com/#!/LAReviewofBook (https://plus.google.com/1090180 (http://pinterest.com/source/ (http://www.reddit.com/

@craigmod
 Home About / Speaking / Essays Ahab! / Bibliotype PRE/POST

HO ME  J O URNAL  Books in the Age of the iPad

Translations: BEL OR U SSIAN , JAPAN ESE, PORTU GESE

-- Craig Mod, MAR CH 2 0 1 0

GOOD RIDDANCE. As the publishing industry wobbles and Kindle sales jump, book romanticists cry themselves to sleep. But really, what are we shedding tears over? We're losing the throwaway paperback. The airport paperback. The beachside paperback. We're losing the dregs of the publishing world: disposable books. The book printed without consideration of form or sustainability or longevity. The book produced to be consumed once and then tossed. The book you bin when you're moving and you need to clean out the closet. These are the first books to go. And I say it again, good riddance. Once we dump this weight we can prune our increasingly obsolete network of distribution. As physicality disappears, so too does the need to fly dead trees around the world. You already know the potential gains: edgier, riskier books in digital form, born from a lower barrier-to-entry

From 2003-2009 I spent six years trying to make beautiful printed books. Six years. Focused on printed books. In the 00s. And I loved it. I loved the process. The finality of the end product. I loved the sexy-as-hell tactility of those little ink and paper bricks. But I can tell you this: the excitement I feel about the iPad as a content creator, designer and publisher -- and the potential it brings -- must be acknowledged. Acknowledged bluntly and with perspective. With the iPad we finally have a platform for consuming rich-content in digital form. What does that mean? To understand just why the iPad is so exciting we need to think about how we got here. I want to look at where printed books stand in respect to digital publishing, why we historically haven't read long- form text on screens and how the iPad is wedging itself in the middle of everything. In doing so I think we can find the line in the sand to define when content should be printed or digitized. This is a conversation for books-makers, web-heads, content-creators, authors and designers. For people who

CO NTENTS

i. Good riddance ii. Defined by content iii. The universal container iv. Books we make a. Specimen table b. Recommendations c. Discussion

S P O NS O RED BY

to publish. New modes of storytelling. Less environmental impact. A rise in importance of editors. And, yes -- paradoxically -- a marked increase in the quality of things that do get printed.

love beautifully made things. And for the storytellers who are willing to take risks and want to consider the most appropriate shape and media for their yarns.

FOR TOO LONG, the act of printing something in and of itself has been placed on too high a pedestal. The true value of an object lies in what it says, not its mere existence. And in the case of a book, that value is intrinsically connected with content. Let's divide content into two broad groups. Content without well-defined form (Formless Content (Fig. 1)) Content with well-defined form (Definite Content (Fig. 2)) Formless Content can be reflowed into different formats and not lose any intrinsic meaning. It's content divorced from layout. Most novels and works of non-fiction are Formless. When Danielle Steele sits at her computer, she doesn't think much about how the text will look printed. She thinks about the story as a waterfall of text, as something that can be poured into any container. (Actually, she probably just thinks awkward and sexy things, but awkward and sexy things without regard for final form.) Content with form -- Definite Content -- is almost totally the opposite of Formless Content. Most texts composed with images, charts, graphs or poetry fall under this umbrella. It may be reflowable, but depending on how it's reflowed, inherent meaning and quality of the text may shift.

Fig. 1

Fig. 2

F OR M L E SS CONT E NT

-- retaining meaning in any container

D EF I NI T E CONT ENT

-- meaning shifts with container

You can sure as hell bet that author Mark Z. Danielewski is well aware of the final form of his next novel. His content is so Definite it's actually impossible to digitize and retain all of the original meaning. Only Revolutions, a book loathed by many, forces readers to flip between the stories of two characters. The start of each printed at opposite ends of the book. A designer may, of course, working in concert with the author, imbue Formless Content with additional meaning in layout. The final combination of design and text becoming Definite Content.(See specimen: Vas) For an extreme and ubiquitous contemporary example of Definite Content, see Tufte. Love him or hate him, you have to admit he's a rare combination of author and designer, completely obsessed with final form, meaning and perfection in layout.(Fig. 3)

In the context of the book as an object, the key difference between Formless and Definite Content is the interaction between the content and the page. Formless Content doesn't see the page or its boundaries. Whereas Definite Content is not only aware of the page, but embraces it. It edits, shifts and resizes itself to fit the page. In a sense, Definite Content approaches the page as a canvas -- something with dimensions and limitations -- and leverages these attributes to both elevate the object and the content to a more complete whole. Put very simply, Formless Content is unaware of the container. Definite Content embraces the container as a canvas. Formless content is usually only text. Definite content usually has some visual elements along with text.

Fig. 3

Fig. 4

T UF T E

-- embracing his canvas

D ESI GNI NG B OOKS

-- awareness of physicality

Much of what we consume happens to be Formless. The bulk of printed matter -- novels and non-fiction -- is Formless. In the last two years, devices excelling at displaying Formless Content have multiplied -- the Amazon Kindle being most obvious. Less obvious are devices like the iPhone, whose extremely high resolution screen, despite being small, makes longer texts much more comfortable to read than traditional digital displays. In other words, it's now easier and more comfortable than ever to consume Formless Content in a digital format. Is it as comfortable as reading a printed book? Maybe not. But we're getting closer. When people lament the loss of the printed book, this -- comfort -- is usually what they're talking about. My eyes tire more easily, they say. The batteries run out, the screen is tough to read in sunlight. It doesn't like bath tubs. Important to note is that these aren't complaints about the text losing meaning. Books don't become harder to understand, or confusing just because they're digital. It's mainly issues concerning quality. One inevitable property of the quality argument is that technology is closing the gap (through advancements in screens and batteries) and because of additional features (note taking, bookmarking, searching), will inevitably surpass the comfort level of reading on paper. The convenience of digital text -- on demand, lightweight (in file size and physicality), searchable -- already far trumps that of traditional printed matter. The formula used to be simple: stop printing Formless Content; only print well-considered Definite Content. The iPad changes this.

IT'S NO WONDER WE LOVE OUR PRINTED BOOKS -- we physically cradle them close to our heart. Unlike computer screens, the experience of reading on a Kindle or iPhone (or iPad, one can assume) mimics this familiar maternal embrace. The text is closer to us, the orientation more comfortable. And the seemingly insignificant fact that we touch the text actually plays a very key role in furthering the intimacy of the experience. The Kindle and iPhone are both lovely -- but they only do text. The iPad changes the experience formula.(Fig. 5) It brings the excellent text readability of the iPhone/Kindle to a larger canvas. It combines the intimacy and comfort of reading on those devices with a canvas both large enough and versatile enough to allow for well considered layouts.

Fig. 5

Fig. 6

T HE NEW EQUAT I ON

-- retaining structural meaning in digital form

D EF I NI T E CONT ENT 1 : 1 W I T H I PAD

-- a first

What does this mean? Well, most obviously that a 1:1 digital adaptation of Definite Content(Fig. 6) books will now be possible. However, I don't think this is a solution we should blindly embrace. Definite Content in printed books is laid out specifically for that canvas, that page size. While the iPad may be similar in physical scope to those books, duplicating layouts would be a disservice to the new canvas and modes of interaction introduced by the iPad. Take something as fundamental as pages, for example. The metaphor of flipping pages already feels boring and forced on the iPhone. I suspect it will feel even more so on the iPad. The flow of content no longer has to be chunked into `page' sized bites. One simplistic reimagining of book layout would be to place chapters on the horizontal plane with content on a fluid vertical plane.(Fig. 7)

Fig. 7

Fig. 8

VER T I CAL CHAPT ER S

-- breaking habit

T HE I NF I NI T E CONT ENT PL ANE

In printed books, the two-page spread was our canvas. It's easy to think similarly about the iPad. Let's not. The canvas of the iPad must be considered in a way that acknowledge the physical boundaries of the device, while also embracing the effective limitlessness of space just beyond those edges. We're going to see new forms of storytelling emerge from this canvas. This is an opportunity to redefine modes of conversation between reader and content. And that's one hell of an opportunity if making content is your thing.

SO: ARE PRINTED BOOKS DEAD? Not quite. The rules for iPad content are still ambiguous. None of us has had enough time with the device to confidently define them. I have, however, spent six years thinking about materials, form, physicality and content and -- to the best of my humble abilities -- producing printed books. So, for now, here's my take on the print side of things moving forward. Ask yourself, "Is your work disposable?" For me, in asking myself this, I only see one obvious ruleset: Formless Content goes digital. Definite Content gets divided between the iPad and printing. Of the books we do print -- the books we make -- they need rigor. They need to be books where the object is embraced as a canvas by designer, publisher and writer. This is the only way these books as physical objects will carry any meaning moving forward.

Fig. 9a

Fig. 9b

NOT D I SPOSAB L E

-- From 1871

NOT D I SPOSAB L E

- From 1871

I propose the following to be considered whenever we think of printing a book: The Books We Make embrace their physicality -- working in concert with the content to illuminate the narrative. The Books We Make are confident in form and usage of material. The Books We Make exploit the advantages of print. The Books We Make are built to last. (Fig. 9a, 9b) The result of this is: The Books We Make will feel whole and solid in the hands. The Books We Make will smell like now forgotten, far away libraries. The Books We Make will be something of which even our children -- who have fully embraced all things digital -- will understand the worth. The Books We Make will always remind people that the printed book can be a sculpture for thoughts and ideas. Anything less than this will be stepped over and promptly forgotten in the digital march forward. Goodbye disposable books. Hello new canvases.

This is a small collection of images of books from my library that I feel embody the above ethos. They're books that embrace their physicality or have stood the test of time. They're the kinds of books the iPad can't displace because they're complete objects. Some utilize painstaking hand printing atop exquisite paper (Heian). Some smell (also, Heian). Others are 100+ years old but still hanging on (Overland Through Asia). Others are very new but are either beautiful collaborations between writer and designer (Vas) or artistic objects in and of themselves (A Dictionary Story). Whatever they may be, they are not going to be thrown away anytime soon.

DESIGNING BOOKS

BEAUTIFUL EVIDENCE

VAS: AN OPERA IN FLATLAND

VAS: AN OPERA IN FLATLAND

L A Y O U T S -- considering page shape

T U F T E -- a well-considered spread

AUTHOR + DESIGNER COLLAB.

SPREAD 2

A DICTIONARY STORY

A DICTIONARY STORY

A DICTIONARY STORY

A DICTIONARY STORY

pssst -- you can signup for my mailing list over here 

Explorers Club

EXTENDED SPREAD

EXTENDED SPREAD 2

EXTENDED SPREAD CLOSEUP

EXTENDED SPREAD CLOSEUP

OVERLAND THROUGH ASIA

OVERLAND THROUGH ASIA

OVERLAND THROUGH ASIA

OVERLAND THROUGH ASIA

GOLD EMBOSSING

AMERICAN PUB. COMPANY

DEDICATED, TWICE

EXPLOITING PRINT

HEIAN

HEIAN

HEIAN

HEIAN

BRUSHES

HAND PRINTED WOODBLOCK

PRINTING DETAIL -- notice the use of metallic ink

WELL AWARE OF FORM

ON  BOOK DE SIGN

DE SIGNING BOOKS

E NVISIONING INFORMATION

ONLY RE VOL U TIONS

VAS:  AN  OPE RA IN  FL ATL AND

A  DICTIONARY STORY

-- Hendel

-- Hochuli

-- Tufte

-- Danielewski

-- Tomasula & Farrell

-- Winston

E L E ME NTS  OF TYPOGRAPHIC STYL E

-- Bringhurst

AB OUT T HE AUT HOR

Craig Mod is a writer, designer, publisher and developer concerned with the future of storytelling (whatever that means). He is co-author of Art Space Tokyo, an intimate guide to the Tokyo art world. He is also co-founding editor and engineer behind TPUTH.com, co-founder and developer of the storytelling project Hitotoki, and frequent collaborator with Information Architects, Japan. He's lived in Tokyo for almost a decade and speaks frequently on the future of books and media and lives for great food and no-bullshit coffee.
An extensive collection of images of books he's designed is available here.
T HANKS

A huge thanks to the following people for their comments, insight and conversations while working on this: Ian Lynam, Hiroko Tabuchi, Liz Danzico,, Julia Barnes, Oliver Reichenstein, Mark Stephen Meadows, Chihiro Suda and that drunken, nameless (but insightful and challenging) angelic barfly in, of all places, Hiroo.

397
 comments Join the discussion...
Best Craig
 Mod Share
 

77


 Login

Peter 29

·

4 years ago
· Reply · Share >

I find it difficult to fully engage any text unless I have the option of throwing it across the room.

Peter
 Neal

Peter · 4 years ago

You mean you don't throw your technology across the room? I regularly throw my iPhone about. You just have to make sure you aim it for a soft landing. It becomes a habit over time. Great stress relief.
6
· Reply · Share >

Danny
 -
 Kindle
 Case
 Blog

Peter Neal · 3 years ago

I would be careful about throwing the kindle around the room. Without protection the e-ink screen is actually really delicate. You have to remember that the modern phone is about 11th generation - so they include a degree of protection that allows you to throws yours across the room. Kindles and ereaders are still very new - technologywise.
· Reply · Share >

R.
 E.
 Warner 3

Peter · 4 years ago

While I agree with your sentiment, I am also tired of putting magazines in the trash. It's exhausting.
· Reply · Share >

macewan

R. E. Warner · 4 years ago

My wife uses the old text deployment systems - books - in assemblagist art. sorta a plug but not really http://assemblagist.org/catego...
3
· Reply · Share >

Renmeleon

macewan · 2 years ago

I work in mixed media as well and love repurposing books. There are those that are sacred that I will scan vs pulling them apart, but I have a few that I keep for cannibalizing. Once you get past that "I'm so going to hell" feeling of ripping a page out it isn't so bad.
2 Dan
 Sutton
· Reply · Share >

R. E. Warner · 2 years ago

I solved that problem by not buying magazines. I like books, though. I have thousands of them. I also have an iPad. So far, I've only read one book on it, and that's because it was out of print as a real book and I couldn't find a copy anywhere. On a more serious note, the author of the article suggests making (real) books more substantial, such that they're built to last and are to some extent "special" items: this is a laudable idea, but would have the downside of making the books (a) more expensive, and (b) assume the characteristics of a "special" item -- one which you wouldn't really go and buy every day... this latter thing is a problem, because it would have the unintended side-effect of marginalizing printed books even more. I think that, unfortunately, the printed word will be gone in another 20 years... and those of us of a certain age (mine) will lament their passing and think to themselves that civilization is finished, and that the last vestiges of a certain type of intellectualism have left the

passing and think to themselves that civilization is finished, and that the last vestiges of a certain type of intellectualism have left the planet forever. But if we step back and examine this a little, in greater context, we can well imagine exactly the same types of things being said and thought by monks in the middle ages, once the printing press was created: no longer were books relegated to being single-instance, illuminated works of art - suddenly, any given book could be made available in volume, and to as many people as wanted a copy. I feel sure that the proponents of the illuminated, hand-written book felt that civilization was coming to an end, and that the printed word had just been cheapened beyond recognition... but in reality, what had happened was that the dissemination of knowledge had just been made incalculably more efficient: far from representing the end of civilization, the printed word represented the end of universal ignorance, and actually lifted civilization rather than depressing it. The same thing is happening here: by virtue of the electronic book, information not previously available in many parts of the world is now available there; one can hold and read many, many more books than, in a real-world, printed environment, one would ever be able to keep; one can share, create, annotate and, most importantly, search material in ways that have never previously been thinkable, let alone possible. But I'll miss paper books - just for myself - that's for sure.
2 gracehoper
· Reply · Share >

Peter · 4 years ago

Isn't deletion so much more final and satisfying?
· Reply · Share >

Dystopia
 Kid

Peter · 4 years ago

But if you can't throw it across the room, maybe you could explore the option of not reading crap?...
· Reply · Share >

ericmacleod 8 Chris
 Brainard
·

Dystopia Kid · 4 years ago

Even a good book can inspire frustration and be thrown across the room
· Reply · Share >

4 years ago

What drugs are you taking that you can't see reality?? The amount of resources it takes to make an Ipad blows away what it take to make a book or even a thousand books and most likely even a 100,000 books. Then there is the whole economic barrier to buying it. Do I pay $500+electricity+new battery after 5 years+damage over time or do I pay 50 cents for a book or $3 for a magazine that I can give away to someone else with real loss to me. This is just another pipe dream of technology saving us that does nothing but dig the hole deeper for the world. I suggest you read Moby Dick to get a good idea of where we are heading as a culture.
14
· Reply · Share >

normm

Chris Brainard · 4 years ago

There's a famous story that is told about Edison. On the day that he first lit up a park (in NY I think) with his new electric light, a reporter came up to him and asked him, "Do you think that someday ordinary people will be able to afford electric lights?" He is reported to have replied, "One day, only the rich will be able to afford candles." We've already seen the exponentially-improving electronic world displacing the physical in many areas, including music and games. Virtual goods use so little resources that they can become much less expensive than real ones. One day, only the rich will be able to afford paper books.
14
· Reply · Share >

rexmonday

normm · 4 years ago

Well, this is all fine and dandy apart from three things. One version of this quote runs "When I am through, electricity will be so cheap that only the rich will be able to afford candles." Hmmm. Remember when nuclear power promised "Electricity too cheap to meter"? Secondly, candles are not so expensive that only the rich can afford them. Finally, the world's poorest people STILL don't have a cheap, reliable electricity supply. "Virtual goods use so little resources that they can become much less expensive than real ones." This is "free is the new cheap" argument, but it's essentially hollow. Virtual goods and utilities may not cost us anything but they DO use up energy, and waste the earth's resources. Google, for example. According to one report, the energy used by two Google searches is enough to boil a kettle.
4
· Reply · Share >

vRaf

rexmonday · 4 years ago

Please get your facts straight before you advance an argument : http://googleblog.blogspot.com...

Thank you
4 A.R.
 Williams
· Reply · Share >

normm · 4 years ago

I think you may a good point about there coming a time when only the rich will be able to afford paper books. Technology and books have different pricing structures. The longer a technology is out, the cheaper and better it gets. The fewer books that are created in a print run the more costly the books will be. As technology drops in price more consumers will decide to purchase it. Also as new features are added to the basic models, even more people will purchase the devices. This will lead to a decrease in the demand for paper books and cause smaller print runs. Smaller print runs will in turn drive the costs of a book up. Since the main purpose of any company is to turn a profit, this may see the companies focus more of their attention to the most profitable form.
2
· Reply · Share >

Chris
 Lynch 7

A.R. Williams · 4 years ago

At one point digital cameras were expensive and film cameras were the norm. How many of you shoot on film still?
· Reply · Share >

michaelbarreto

A.R. Williams · 4 years ago

And it's those low-numbered edition art books that I desire the most, and yet I don't have the money for them. If you have anything of the sort, please don't delay in forwarding it to my address with my deepest thanks to you and your generosity.
3 Dean
 H
· Reply · Share >

normm · 4 years ago

His reply does hold some substance. Many third world still use traditional form of lighting, although the first world are making great strides to decrease cost to be able to supply to the poor.
1
· Reply · Share >

AudeKhatru

normm · 4 years ago

Actually, I would change book to library. Edison was wrong, candles are still cheap, they just don't do the job as well as electric lights. I think it will be a very long time before paper books are so expensive that even an average joe cannot own one. The question is, will everyone want to? I think the answer is no. My son who is 12 may see the day when a paper book is a rarity, but I will not be too surprised if his son never buys a paper book.
1
· Reply · Share >

Brian
 Reach 2 Mike

AudeKhatru · 4 years ago

Maybe candles are cheap at IKEA, but you can spend a pretty penny on them elsewhere. He's closer to right every year.
· Reply · Share >

Chris Brainard · 4 years ago

"The amount of resources it takes to make an Ipad blows away what it take to make a book or even a thousand books and most likely even a 100,000 books." The amount of resources it takes to make an iPad is about the amount of resources it takes to make 20 hardcover books: $600/$30=20. The amount of resources it takes to make some of the upcoming ebook readers is about 3 hardcover books: $90/$30=3. "Do I pay $500+electricity+new battery after 5 years+damage over time" The price of ebook readers will probably come down to the price of a single hardcover book over the next 10 years. All of those will be able to wirelessly access (and probably even store) all the books you have ever bought. And as someone who owns about 5000 books and has had the displeasure of moving with them many times, I say: good riddance to printed books.
7 Dusty
· Reply · Share >

Chris Brainard · 4 years ago

Ancient alchemists were concerned with converting lead to gold. In their quest to do this, they eventually found out how to do much more valuable things. By the 1950s, it was possible to convert lead to gold, but it cost more to convert the lead to gold than the gold was worth. But think of all the other more valuable things chemistry and science have done for us! If the iPad were a device that only read books, then yes, you may be right.

The interesting thing when any new device comes out is the new uses that appear later. First, the device is only used to do things we were already doing elsewhere. Then the things we were doing get better as software makers take fuller advantage of the device's capabilities. Then, entirely new things to do emerge. If authors begin thinking of themselves as software engineers, they'll see entirely new ways to use the device and others like it for storytelling. Interactive novels, novels with bits of video and sound embedded like a web page, a movie that plays in the top of the screen with notes below to read. I mean think of it, a major limitation that movies have in their storytelling is that they are less intimate than a novel. You can't fully get in the character's head. It might be possible to have a hybrid form emerge on these devices. Plus these devices are going to get cheaper and more affordable for everybody.
3 Maria
· Reply · Share >

Chris Brainard · 4 years ago

50¢ for a book? What are you reading? I'm afraid it's you who doesn't see reality. Ebooks are the future, no matter what device they're read on.
3
· Reply · Share >

Jon

Maria · 4 years ago

Used books are pretty cheap and you can find some great stuff. Not 50 cents but about $3 and then guess what, you can lend it to someone else when you're done with it. Not to mention the fact that I can take a book with me and if it gets stolen or lost, well no big loss, I'll be out a few bucks. But if my eReader gets stolen, I'm screwed.
1
· Reply · Share >

Renmeleon

Jon · 2 years ago

I scour the local Dollar Tree occasionally and have found some fabulous books for a dollar. I recently spent 25 on a writing book at Barnes; great book, "The Mind of Your Story", currently on loan to a friend. A week later I found four copies of it at Dollar Tree and snagged them all, gave them as gifts to some of my writers group members. Used bookstores have some fabulous finds too. Completely agree Jon. I can replace a book, but not the tech to read one.
· Reply · Share >

Daniel

Maria · 4 years ago

He's probably reading one of the billions of the "disposable" books available incredibly cheaply from thrift stores and charity shops around the world. Something that won't happen with eBooks.
1
· Reply · Share >

jacech

Daniel · 4 years ago

Of course "incredibly cheaply" will happen with e-books -- it already has! For example, if you go here, http://www.mobileread.com/foru... you can browse an excellent collection of thousands of public domain, nicely formatted, carefully proofread ebooks. All of them are free. Many of them include the original illustrations. And in reply to Chris Brainerd's comment, I would point out that Moby Dick is one of these books. I've read it myself, but I can't recommend it. However, since getting my Kindle I have become a big fan of Charles Dickens!
3 Craig
 Mod
· Reply · Share >

Mod

Daniel · 4 years ago

Project Gutenberg is a great example of what happens to old books in electronic format: they don't cost $.50. They're entirely free: http://www.gutenberg.org/wiki/...
2
· Reply · Share >

Renmeleon

Daniel · 2 years ago

Thank you Jacech for the link. Nice. Craig Mod - Project Gutenberg is great, found them a while ago.
· Reply · Share >

richielau

Chris Brainard · 3 years ago

What year do you live in where books cost 50 cents and magazines cost $3? People do not buy iPads only for book reading, unlike the Kindle. The iPad is not mainly a book reader but has greater application usage than just a book reader. People would buy the device with or

Kindle. The iPad is not mainly a book reader but has greater application usage than just a book reader. People would buy the device with or without the availability of books. However it would make sense that people with the device will buy books and magazines on the iPad, because of it's attractive canvas size and mobility. It would make better sense to compare eBooks to printed Books in this case.
2
· Reply · Share >

Renmeleon

richielau · 2 years ago

Sorry, had to laugh. $3.00 for a magazine? I wish. The cheapest one I read is around $6.00, but the majority of the magazines I buy are $12 - 17.00 and I don't buy them very often. I love tech as much as I love analog, iPads and eBooks have their place. I don't see printed books falling off planet yet. Pleasure reading I would get a Nook/Kindle as I enjoy the ability to carry more books than I could lug around in a backpack; that kind of mobility for my reference material would be fabulous. I am working on my Masters currently though and, as a student, much prefer a printed book in my hand; that is my kind of "interactive".
· Reply · Share >

Martin
 Wells

Chris Brainard · 3 years ago

What if your friend lives on the other side of the planet as is often the case today in our globally connected network of far-flung relationships? Then sending an electronic version seems more practical, doesn't it? Your simple $3 book exchange now becomes a $53 book exchange once you add the cost of placing it on truck, boat, plane. What is ten times $53? Answer: about the cost of an iPad.
1 Guest
· Reply · Share >

Chris Brainard · 4 years ago

I hear what you're saying. That said, I wouldn't let these developments trouble you. Paper books and the conveniences they offer are not going away anytime soon, not until other alternatives meet the very same requirements we demand from pulp. However, consider this: eBooks and other portable electronic reading devices, *used largely as reading devices for pleasure and/or pure discovery* are still in the very early adopter phase, when considering their overall penetration in the worldwide market for those specific uses. In the future, reading portability will be embedded in one's eyeglasses (unless we evolve to a place where genetic selection eliminates nearsightedness and other minor visual abnormalities); on nanopainted, electronically charged walls; on the very windows of our homes and autos, etc. etc. - all this and more is on its way. t's very difficult to point to when these developments will happen, but they *will* happen. And, they *will* become very, very inexpensive. eBooks will go the way of calculators in price. Reading devices will be given away for free, leveraged against content (where the real value is). I treasure the ability to just buy a book at my local used book outlet, for free - that pleasure will be with us for a long, long time. Paper books will not be obsolete for a long, long time. In fact, I see a day when network enabled ePaper is just as cheap as pulp-based paper, with the idea that you only have to buy a notebook with a few pages of the stuff to download things endlessly. New forms of presentation media will also create a slow evolution of how our species *wants* to present things. I wouldn't fret about this. Rather, consider it all as a parade of development that one can watch as it happens, and in fact read about in a pulp-paper-based book - as many of us do, today, until the economies and efficiencies and human "touch" of these technologies become so compelling that most would never think of using them again. There will always be paper books, in some form or other. Just like the quill pen, paper books will contain a satisfaction for some. That's OK, The days of paper books are numbered, but that number of days will be measured over many decades. Just as the quill pen slipped out of use, so will the paper book. By the time we get to that event horizon, electronic reading will seem so second nature, so cheap, to easy to access, or full of creative possibilities (for those that want to exercise them) that paper as we know it will simply not be desired. I know that seems hard to believe, but buggy whips and quill pens were once thought of in the same way, so were stone tablets.
1
· Reply · Share >

Mathew
 Negru

Chris Brainard · 4 years ago

While you're definitely right to look beyond only the supposed savings in paper to the costs of the more complete system, hopefully you're much too pessimistic regarding the resource price of eBook readers. One doubts the manufacturing an eBook reader is quite so stupendously resource intensive, or toxic waste producing as you suggest. But as you implicitly bring out, insisting that the components be recyclable and not result in large amounts of toxic waste whose long term costs are externalized onto vulnerable outsiders may be a necessary direction to take.
· Reply · Share >

badams77

Chris Brainard · 4 years ago

Funny I just blogged about the end of the book, at Internet Future UK. Its probably going to take the whole decade to end the paper book, but once the book is a digital item, it may gain all sorts of AI bells and wistles.
· Reply · Share >

cimota

Chris Brainard · 4 years ago

cimota

Chris Brainard · 4 years ago

Hm. Wood pulp is an awful way to provide information. It comes from decimated forests, it uses harsh bleaching chemicals and large hot factories. Once the books eventually are made, they need to be stored, transported in huge trucks and when not sold, pulped again and sent to the bleaching tubs. Most of the money in the book industry goes to run the factories and put gas in the trucks and pay the drivers and factory workers. I will not lament the loss of the 50c novel because I don't buy 50c novels. I only buy hardbacks which I intend to keep, and I think this is what Craig is getting at. The crappy low end of the market is vanishing. We will enjoy the feeling of better quality media for our content at the same time as having better access to globalised content. And there's a certain myopia among the book obsessed. iPad is not a eBook reader like the Kindle. All of the arguments you give are very easily applied to the Kindle and the Sony eReaders because of their limited utility. iPad is aimed as a 'content' consumption device, a device which could potentially replace a full PC in many households, a device which will challenge the laptop for certain knowledge workers (including this one), a travelling entertainment device, something to amuse the kids on long journeys, a digital picture frame, a portable email client, a web browser sans compare.
· Reply · Share >

Steven
 Sanders

cimota · 4 years ago

Wood pulp may be awful from certain perspectives, but when it comes to archival qualities, it surpasses digital by an order of magnitude. As example, find digital information from 1985 and the cheapest paperback printed at the same time. The digital info will require a hard to find obsolete method of reading it, assuming it hasn't succumbed to bit-rot. The paperback will be yellowed but easily readable. One twice its age will likely be the same. This all isn't just speculation, there was a recent problem with NASA having difficulty accessing old probe information because they couldn't find a machine to read it on. Essentially, digital media turns our literature into an electronic equivalent of of an oral culture, with superior error checking. Mind, I'm not saying to be a Luddite about this, or think that pulp books are like clay tablets in terms of durability, but rather that eBooks are not some panacea, and if any creator wants any decent chance for their work to be around for history to care about, they should take some steps at getting something more archival produced. The crappy low end of the market is an important part of our culture, IMO, and I'd like for future civilizations to at least see some of it, instead of recording a mass extinction of that type of information in the early 2000's.
4
· Reply · Share >

caphector

Steven Sanders · 4 years ago

Re: Finding digital content from 1985. That all depends on how the content was stored. Did it get saved in an opaque format only readable by it's creator? As you say, it'll be hard to get back Did it get saved as an open format, such as plain text, jpg or bmp? Then you're golden. Here's an article I dug on from 1985 from an old BBS. It reads just fine: http://www.textfiles.com/100/c...
1
· Reply · Share >

Steven
 Sanders

Steven Sanders · 4 years ago

Quite true regarding open standards; I should of been more clear. The example text given survived via transfer to the internet at some point. As long as the internet is around, and that text keeps getting saved by various people on various servers, we are good. But I was thinking more in terms of say, .txt files saved on 5 1/4 floppies that weren't transitioned. They are in your basement or something. Unless you kept your old gear and it still works, you'll need to go find a 5 1/4 drive, pray you aren't stuck using a mac and have to buy some USB workaround or something, (Full disclosure: This is typed on a mac) hope your PC mobo still has a floppy port, and that the disc is still readable. And that you are a geek who can do all of that, instead of your average computer user. That's the kind of archival problem I'm worried about.
· Reply · Share >

Kirk
 McElhearn
 

cimota · 4 years ago

.
1
· Reply · Share >

gracehoper

cimota · 4 years ago

Actually, as someone who has worked at a bookstore for many years, those small "mass market" paperbacks that don't get sold just get the cover torn off of them and then thrown in the trash. They aren't even worth the cost of shipping back to the publisher to be pulped or whatever.
· Reply · Share >

Craig
 Mod

Mod

gracehoper · 4 years ago

I wonder if there isn't a better place for those books? Is there not some tax-incentive to donate them to an organization like A Room To Read (http://www.roomtoread.org/Page... instead of just binning them?

A Room To Read (http://www.roomtoread.org/Page... instead of just binning them?
1 jorge_i
· Reply · Share >

gracehoper · 4 years ago
· Reply · Share >

good, point, now we are also adding to overtaxed landfills.

Mitz

cimota · 4 years ago

While I agree that the iPad has more functionality than the Kindle, Nook, or eReader, I don't see it replacing a full PC, or even a laptop anytime soon. Apps can only get a person so far. But that is perhaps an argument for a different day.
· Reply · Share >

sierrahotel058

Mitz · 4 years ago

I think you may be mistaken here. Even the lowly smartphone has already replaced laptops for many people. Tablets will replace many more. We forget that a large percentage of laptop users purchased their machines because at the time it was the only real portable option to do what they do on a computer. Most users do not need or require the power of a full blown PC. They email, surf, socialize, read, consult maps...find a good restaurant, etc. I think the iPad will be transformational as a reader, not necessarily because it is the the best reader, but because it will be a powerful device in so many arenas....and therefore sell in the millions. Market dominance by definition means that content producers will flock to take advantage of the platform....by producing content that separates them from the rest. We are in for a great ride.
1 cimota
· Reply · Share >

Mitz · 4 years ago

Hi Mitz, It may not replace it for you (or even for me). But iPads (and their descendants and clones) will replace boxy beige PCs for a lot of people (including half my family).
1
· Reply · Share >

Brian
 Reach

Mitz · 4 years ago

I see it happening already - cloud computing and solid state drives are starting to improve, and have been around for several years. Soon we'll be streaming everything, and all we'll need are screens, cameras, and speakers.
· Reply · Share >

Keith
 X

Mitz · 4 years ago

An iPad is primarily a content consumer device with a limited content creation role, for such things as emails, a simple web page or photo formatting. Content creators will continue to use fully functional computers, as will niche consumers of highend content such as processor-intensive games. The thing to recognize is that the vast majority of computer owners today are content consumers. They neither need nor want a powerful system, but they had no choice. Those people will move quickly to embrace the tablet / ereader / smartphone platform.
· Reply · Share >

Scott

·

4 years ago

Great, thoughtful article. Some random thoughts, in no particular order: That many books are "disposable" isn't necessarily a reflection on the quality of the physical product, but rather of the content itself. Ironic that you chose Danielle Steele as an example. I bet you have hundreds of albums that you've listened to over and over, and dozens of movies that you've seen several times. But the number of books people re-read is probably really small. I just did a quick survey of one of my bookshelves. Out of 89 books, there were 20 that I'd read more than once, and that was skewed high because it had a large number of children's books, like Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, that I read obsessively as a kid. Anyway, the point is that if a book is thrown in a box in the garage or left on the airplane or in a hotel, it's probably because the *content* was only meant to be consumed once. One problem I face in the switch to digital books is the loss of a signaling function. I like having my house full of bookshelves stuffed with books. I like seeing them and touching them. I like it when other people see them and touch them. Whenever I go to someone's house, once of the first things I do is wander over to the bookshelf to see what they read. Physical books provide a powerful social signal that I worry will wink out in the transition to digital. Admittedly, the transition of music to digital means this could just require a behavioral change. I love music as much as I love books, and for years kept my CDs displayed in racks. But the switch to digital meant they just took up a lot of space without contributing anything. Now, signalling about music tastes is done through direct conversation -- "Heard any good music lately?" -- and through browsing through someone else's iPod. I''m not too worried about losing my whole book library to some technological malfunction. The Kindle, at least, backs up your purchases in Amazon's cloud, so you can re-download any book you've bought at any time. And since an EMP powerful enough to fry Amazon's databases
see
 more

7

· Reply · Share >

7

· Reply · Share >

Craig
 Mod

Mod

Scott · 4 years ago

Hi Scott, Thanks for the great comment. Responses below: > That many books are "disposable" isn't necessarily a reflection on the quality of the physical product, but rather of the content itself. Ironic that you chose Danielle Steele as an example. I bet you have hundreds of albums that you've listened to over and over, and dozens of movies that you've seen several times. But the number of books people re-read is probably really small. I just did a quick survey of one of my bookshelves. Out of 89 books, there were 20 that I'd read more than once, and that was skewed high because it had a large number of children's books, like Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, that I read obsessively as a kid. Anyway, the point is that if a book is thrown in a box in the garage or left on the airplane or in a hotel, it's probably because the *content* was only meant to be consumed once. Exactly. And I think being able to judge content appropriately -- is it single serving or not? -- is one of the cornerstones in choosing the right medium for it. > One problem I face in the switch to digital books is the loss of a signaling function. I like having my house full of bookshelves stuffed with books. I like seeing them and touching them. I like it when other people see them and touch them. Whenever I go to someone's house, once of the first things I do is wander over to the bookshelf to see what they read. I completely agree. I'm an architecture nut and one of the first things I look for in house design is how they did the bookshelves.
see
 more

3

· Reply · Share >

Load more comments

Subscribe

Add
 Disqus
 to
 your
 site

J O URNAL (LO NG -FO RM) »

S ATE LLI TE (S HO RTE R-FO RM) »

BO O KS / P RI NTE D MATTE R »

ABO UT

Photography, hello Subcompact Publishing Platforming Books Hack the Cover The DigitalPhysical Post-Artifact Books and Publishing Seeing Prime: Panasonic's 14mm Lumix Lens Woods of Wales: Do Lectures, 2010 Kickstartup Embracing the Digital Book Books in the Age of the iPad Annapurna Moonrise GF1 Field Test -- Video Supplement GF1 Field Test -- 16 Days in the Himalayas @font-face: The Potential of Web Typography

Pull back Facebook is just fine Wind Up Kidd Chronicle Subcompact round up and The Daily An invitation -- Roden Explorers Unbindings and edges Our bit heavens Publishing startups and the great fuzziness Twitter for minimalists Ahab! A pointable we [3/3] A pointable we [2/3] A pointable we [1/3] The momentum of Steve Jobs ... read more »

Flipboard for iPhone Do You Know? (2008 edition) Art Space Tokyo Curing Japan's America Addiction Goodbye Madame Butterfly Last Of The Red Hot Poppas Do You Know? (2006 edition) Kuhaku
O THE R / MI S C / O LDE R WO RK

San Francisco, Tokyo, New York, etc. Thinking about the future of books and publishing and storytelling. More? More!

Photography Interactive

© 2001 - 2014 CRAIG MO D T WIT T ER | RSS

Preface IT'S  EARLY  in  the  twenty-first century, and that means that these words will mostly be read by nonpersons--automatons or numb mobs composed of people who are no longer acting as individuals. The words will be minced into atomized search-engine keywords within industrial cloud computing facilities located in remote, often secret locations around the world. They will be copied millions of times by algorithms designed to send an advertisement to some person somewhere who happens to resonate with some fragment of what I say. They will be scanned, rehashed, and misrepresented by crowds of quick and sloppy readers into wikis and automatically aggregated wireless text message streams. Reactions will repeatedly degenerate into mindless chains of anonymous insults and inarticulate controversies. Algorithms will find correlations between those who read my words and their purchases, their romantic adventures, their debts, and, soon, their genes. Ultimately these words will contribute to the fortunes of those few who have been able to position themselves as lords of the computing clouds. The vast fanning out of the fates of these words will take place almost entirely in the lifeless world of pure information. Real human eyes will read these words in only a tiny minority of the cases. And yet it is you, the person, the rarity among my readers, I hope to reach. The words in this book are written for people, not computers. I want to say: You have to be somebody before you can share yourself.

