The Coming of the Book
The Impact of Printing

MGHAWfc VALLEY
I

CENTRAL Btei AID
Trafwhted by David Gerard
Edited by Geoffrey Novell-Smith and David Wootton

HR \RWASSOC.

ISBN 902308

17

3

First published as L' Apparition du Litre

by Editions Albin Michel, 1958 Editions Albin Michel, 1958
This edition
first

published 1976

NLB,
NLB,

1976

7 Carlisle Street,

London,

Wi

Filmset in

Monophoto Garamond

by Servis Filmsetting Ltd, Manchester

and printed by Lowe and Brydone, Thetford, Norfolk Designed by Elizabeth Mackie

Foreword
Preface

Henri-Jean Martin Lucien Febvre

7 9
1 5

Manuscripts

Marcel Thomas

1.

Preliminaries:
1.

2.

The Introduction of Paper into Europe The Progress of Paper Preconditions of the Growth of Paper-Making: Natural and
Industrial

29
30
33

3.

Commercial Factors

37

4.

The Coming of Printing and
Industry

the

Development of the Paper
39

2.

The Technical Problems and
1.

their Solution

45 45

2.
3.

The Wood-Cut, Ancestor of the Book? The 'Discovery' of Printing The Making of the Type
Composition and Impression
Imposition The Chinese Precedent

49
56
61

4.
5.

68
71

6.

3.

The Book:
1.

Its

Visual Appearance
:

77
78
Printer's

Type Founts
Inside the

2.
3.

Book Title Page, Colophon and The Text and Format of the Book
Clothing the Book: The Binding

Mark

83

87

4.
5.

Illustration

90 104

4.

The Book
1.

as a

Commodity

109

Costs

109
1 1 5

2.

The Problem of Finance

The
1.

Little

World of the Book

1

28

2.
3.

The Journeymen The Masters From the Humanist
Authors and

129
136
Printer to the Bookseller of the Enlightenment
143

4.

their Rights

159

6.

The Geography
1.

of the

Book

167 '67
17 l8

The Journeys of Printers
Places to Set

2. 3.

Up

Business

Geography and Publishing

4.

Printing Conquers the

World
:

198 198 198

A. The Slav Countries

Bohemia and Moravia
Poland The Southern Slavs
Russia
B.
C.

200
203
205

The New World The Far East

207 212

7.

The Book Trade
1.

216 216
222

2.
3.

Some Basic Data: Sizes of Editions Some Problems for the Trade Business Methods at the Time of the Book-Fairs
Towards

224

4.
5.

New

Business Methods

234
239 244

Privilege and Piracy

6.

Censorship and Banned Books

8.

The Book
1
.

2.
3.

as a Force for Change From Manuscript to Printed Book Humanism and the Book The Book and the Reformation
Printing and Language

248

248 262

287 319
333
3
5 5

4.

Notes
Index

Preface
Lucien Febvre

About

the year 1450 some rather unusual 'manuscripts' made their appearance in the northern regions of Western Europe. Although not

very different in appearance from traditional manuscripts, they were 'impressed' on paper, sometimes on vellum, with the mechanical aid of
it

which used moveable type. The process was simple. But was the object of considerable curiosity and fascination. In fact, these new books were to cause profound changes not only in the habits of
a printing press in the

thought but also

working conditions of

secular and religious

The changes (we won't say revolution) soon broke the bounds of this original audience and made considerable impact on the world outside. The object of the present work is to study those changes, their causes and effects, and show just how the printed book became something the manuscript neither could nor did become, for reasons we will have to analyse in detail. If this book
scholars, the great readers of the time.

had not already been titled The Coming of the Book, it could easily have been called without pretension The Book in the Service of History.
It

Let there be no mistake do not take this book for something it is not. was never our intention to write or rewrite a history of printing there would be no point in doing again what has already been done by such
;
:

basic
It

works on

at

can safely be assumed that the authors know the history of the book - and that least, as much as is known about it at present they are fully

the subject as Mortet's Les Origines

et

debuts de I'imprimerie.

tentative

aware of all the work done on printing history since Mortet, necessarily though it is, especially for the early period, and sometimes quite

inadequate. There will be no lengthy account of the discovery of printabout ing. Nor will there be any repetition of the hoary old arguments
the primacy of this or that country or about such-and-such a masterthe printer's significance compared with another's, over the assigning of
for printing's discovery to this or that individual, or over the provenance of the oldest incunabula. Perfectly good books are available

honour

to keep anyone interested

up to date on such questions.

It

was not part

10

of our purpose to publish another work of that kind. The book is a relative newcomer in western society.

It

began

its

career in the mid- 1 5th century, and its future is no longer certain, threatened as it is by new inventions based on different principles. What
it satisfy? What role did it assume? What causes did it serve or was born in one of those creative periods of change and transition, which all lasting civilisations go through. It was conceived and created

needs did
fail ? It

a little after the

commotion caused by

the invention of

gunpowder and

portable firearms, instruments which men in the ijth century enjoyed contrasting to the peaceable printing-press. It came into being several decades before the enlargement of a world whose boundaries were no
greater in the time of Aquinas than they had been in the time of Ptolemy before, that is, the great sea voyages after 1492 led to the sei2ure of great continents previously unknown to Europeans. Printing began achieving
:

results before the progressive development of a new perception of space gave western man a system of perspective which has conformed to his needs over the past 500 years, and before the calculations of an astro-

nomer-monk

in the Baltic led to the first of the

many

humiliations to

which this Earth of ours was to be subjected in the succeeding centuries. Thus the printed book played its part in a whole range of basic changes which were taking place at the time, though not all at once, nor in such a manner that their effects were cumulative from the very beginning. Yet how can we understand what all this meant to men of the late i jth and
early i6th centuries unless

we

grasp the great variety of innovations of

which printing was a part? To repeat we hope to establish how and why the printed book was something more than a triumph of technical ingenuity, but was also one of the most potent agents at the disposal of western civilisation in bring:

ing together the scattered ideas of representative thinkers. It rendered vital service to research by immediately transmitting results from one
effort

researcher to another ; and speedily and conveniently, without laborious or unsupportable cost, it assembled permanently the works of
the

most sublime creative

spirits in all fields

-

a service

which Michelet

has described in unforgettable terms. By so doing, it gave their ideas a new lease of life and endowed them with unparalleled strength and vigour. They came to have a new kind of coherence and, by the same
token, an incomparable power for both transformation and propagation. Fresh concepts crossed whole regions of the globe in the very shortest
time, wherever language did not deny them access. The book created new habits of thought not only within the small circle of the learned, but

Preface
far

n

beyond, in the intellectual
are

life

of

all

who

used their minds. In short

hoping effective means
present

we

to prove that the printed book of mastery over the whole world.
its

was one of the most
That
is

the goal of the

work and, we hope,

novelty.

As usual there is an important preliminary problem how to arrange the book and where to set limits to the subject. We will not use those quite puerile subdivisions based on the artificial distinctions of dates, the kind of thing that is fed to schoolchildren to keep them happy 'On what day, month, and year did the Middle Ages end?' (We would translate such a question thus 'What date, in the mind of its inventors, marked the birth and the death of that intellectual abstraction, with no claim to existence
: : :

other than pedagogic convenience?') We propose, without wasting any time on such controversies, to examine the influence and the practical
significance of the printed book during the first 300 years of its existence, from the mid-i5th century to the end of the i8th, that is, the period between two changes of climate. At the beginning stands an epoch of intellectual, social and economic upheaval which was to make a lasting mark on the minds, the attitudes, and the actions of Europeans, and which Michelet in a happy phrase called the Renaissance. Then, at the other end of the period, we deal with the second great epoch, another age of confusion, in which political revolution occurs amid a succession of radical economic and social changes leading in the cultural field to that literary and artistic revolution which, under the name of Romanticism, was to unleash further new ideas and feelings. And finally, despite those rechargings of sensibility which found expression through a

remarkable upsurge of Christianity and through a passionate search for emotional satisfaction linked to the promise of social reform, let us not
forget that
raries

modern industry produced, among those

whom contempo-

began to call the proletariat, a class consciousness oriented towards action and the fulfilment of its demands.

The end of one epoch is the beginning of another. An elite society gave way to a mass society. Printing found itself inevitably drawn to a further profound transformation. New needs and a new clientele. Therefore
mechanisation replaced the old hand press. Therefore, the antagonism developed between craftsman and mechanic, between old-style printing

shop and modern mass production. A series of new inventions quickly followed which did much to increase what we might call the virulence of the press. Slowly the machine found its way into what was soon to

12

become the book industry. The printing press sought out and found a form of motive power different from muscle-power. Between 1803 and
1814 Koenig built three types of machine which were the prototypes of modern printing plant: the power-driven platen press, the stop-cylinder press and the two-revolution press. As early as 1791 an Englishman, Nicholson, had worked out the principle of the cylinder steam press

with self-inking

rollers.

Inventions like these of course greatly acceler-

ated the output of books and prepared the ground for the newspaper, the most recent newcomer yet to the world of print. The newspaper! It
characterises the grip printing had 2oth centuries. All such inventions

on readers in the late i9th and early were the result of great social trans-

formations, but in turn gave further impetus to their development. The whole period is thus of about 400 years duration, from the

Renaissance to the Industrial Revolution.
this stretch

How

should

we

subdivide

of time?

What

criteria

should

we apply?

If

it

were a matter of writing a history of printing during the

first

three

centuries of its existence

we would be

forced to divide the

ing to the stages of development of printing not know if this would produce the best results, for the methods used in

work accordEven then I do technology.

1787 (when Frangois Ambroise-Didot I, learning from earlier attempts, devised a press which permitted a whole sheet to be printed at once) were very much those which Gutenberg would have recognised as being

employed in his own shop, had he been able to reappear and visit a printing press in the France of Louis XVI. But as we have said, the story is about something other than the history of a technique. It has to do
with the

on European culture of a new means of communicating was essentially aristocratic, a society that accepted and was long to accept a culture and a tradition of learning which was restricted to certain social groups. We will re-use the word we have just used, despite its ambiguities and equivocations, and speak of a relatively restricted elite. An elite which, apart from the aristocracy of blood, included those who had moneyed wealth, political position or prestigious intellectual reputations. How did the printed book facilitate the rule and the activity of these men? How did it preserve the moral, religious and literary heritage accumulated by their predecessors from
effect

ideas within a society that

the

nth

to the ijth century?

How

did

it

ensure the continuity of a

tradition which linked Gutenberg's contemporaries with the three ancient

cultures of Greece,

Rome

and Early Christianity? Conversely,

how

Preface

i$

was the book as an agent for the propagation of the new ideas which we classify sometimes under the name Renaissance, sometimes under that of Humanism? How were the two major religious denominations, Catholic and Protestant, served by the press, not to mention other
successful

did it help the counterattack by unbelievers, firstly then Freethinkers, Deists, then Atheists, and finally Materialists, against
sects?

And how

revealed religion? Then, again, what literary forms might it claim responsibility for spreading? What others did it resist? How did the
physical format of the book help Latin survive its long struggle with the vernacular, or the vernacular languages against old established Latin? I

book like this one does not recognise any divisions (within the basic framework of the social structure) other than those which are created by the problems it deals with, and which it aims to
need not continue.
help the reader understand.

A

was necessary to say all this briefly before embarking on a journey which no previous guide, so far as we know, has ever pointed out the hazards or come up with the results we are looking for. At least we will try to produce something not too unpleasant to read, and once the book is read the reader may at least have the confidence that he has found in it results born of trustworthy statistics and of enquiry which no-one has
It

in

yet generalised or assessed.

Manuscripts
Marcel Thomas*

At the beginning of a book dealing with the evolution of printing in the West, perhaps it is worth briefly recalling the historical role of the
manuscript, for so many centuries the sole written medium through which ideas found expression. It is not our intention to offer a history of the manuscript book, which would require a whole volume to itself, but rather to show how the production of manuscripts was organised from

about the middle of the i3th century to the late ijth in response to growing demand, and to point out what needs the manuscript tried to
fulfil

up

to the time

when

the printed

book appeared and took

things a

stage further.

Historians have long divided the evolution of the manuscript in western Europe into two main periods, the 'Monastic Age', and the 'Secular

Age'. These terms, long current in the field, and familiar to anyone who knows something of the subject, may be somewhat lacking in precision,

but nevertheless they do express an undoubted reality. In the 700 years between the Fall of Rome and the izth century, it was the monasteries

and other

ecclesiastical establishments associated

with them which

enjoyed an almost complete monopoly of book production and so of book culture. It is also true that from the end of the i2th century a profound transformation took place. The social and intellectual changes

which are particularly clearly reflected in the founding of the universities and the development of learning among the laity, and which occurred at the same time as the bourgeoisie emerges as a class, had profound
repercussions on the ways in which books came to be written, copied and distributed. In this short survey we will ignore the Monastic Age which has been
the subject of
*

many

recent and excellent studies. 1

Our

intention

is

to

Keeper

in the

Department of Manuscripts, Bibliotheque Nationale.

16

show (in so far as the surviving evidence makes it possible, for many of the problems relating to our subject are still far from being solved) how, from the i3th century onwards, new organisational structures made it
possible to satisfy,

more or

less,

expressed by a steadily growing

the new requirements number of clients.

for

books

is impossible to draw up an accurate list of centres of book manuscript production or furnish details of the output of a par-

Although

it

ticular region at a particular time, we can at least give a reasonably accurate impression of the conditions under which books were made and

1 3 th, 1 4th and 1 5 th centuries. We will not summarise here even the most important features in the evolution of the manuscript book, we will only describe the situation that had developed at the

disseminated in the

time

printers placed their of book disposal producers.

when

new

techniques of manufacture at the

In the Secular Period, if we leave aside changes in the presentation and decoration of books, only small technical improvements can be said to have taken place. But one innovation must be mentioned because it had

important

effects

namely the introduction of paper.

both upon their manufacture and upon their price, It did not replace parchment, but

supplemented it and made possible the production of less expensive books alongside the traditional luxury manuscripts, though the difference in price was not as great as is sometimes thought. It also made
possible the production of books in greater numbers than before. Later in this volume there is a brief account of paper and its introduction into Europe,
possible.

and we

shall see

how papermaking made

printing

manuscript goes, paper did not offer advantages over parchment apart from its lower price and the possibility of producing it in unlimited quantity, in theory at least. Medieval paper was more
far as the

As

fragile

to ink

and

than parchment, had a rougher surface, and was less impervious less amenable to the pigments used by the illuminators. On

hand it was lighter in weight. But less than might be imagined, parchment of great delicacy was being produced in the i3th century, even thinner than the paper of the same period. For example
the other
since

many

menter and copyist, actually
translation

small Bibles of that date were, thanks to the joint skills of parchless bulky than the two-volume modern

by Lemaistre de Sac. Admittedly it requires keen eyesight to them now, and the eyes need to be accustomed to the handwriting. But there is no doubt that these small Bibles were less cumbersome than
read

Manuscripts
the

77

more famous

early printed Bibles,

and

in fact portable printed Bibles

its low cost and, by the abundance, it is not easy to make exact comparisons with parchment or vellum. While we possess many manuscripts which mention the price of vellum, and accounts (usually royal accounts)
1

were not produced until the i6th century. Although the main advantage of paper was
5th century,
its

relative

which record the purchase of vellum and paper, 2 the significance of the terms used is not always clear. Vellum was generally bought by the bundle (usually a dozen and a half whole skins), or by the dozen skins, or by the individual whole skin, or by the cahier, that is, already cut and
folded into booklets of six or eight leaves. When cahiers are mentioned in accounts we have no way of knowing their dimensions or even the

number of pages, and so we can draw no

firm conclusions about costs.

At the end of the i4th century the price of skins varied between 12 and 20 deniers in Paris. The average area of a skin being about Y2 a square metre, ten to twelve were needed to make a volume of 150 leaves measuring 24 cmx 16 cm, typical dimensions of a manuscript book in the i4th-i jth centuries. The raw material from which such a book was made could thus be worth anything from 10 to 20 sous in its crude state, and to this we would have to add 4 to 6 deniers for preparing it, i.e. clearing the surface of the remaining bristles and of other blemishes to
it fit to write on. Even these figures are only an indication, since varied so on the quality of the skin, the supplies much prices depending available, and the region in which it was sold. At Paris, the Lendit Fair

render

was an important centre for the

sale

of vellum.

simple calculation will be sufficient to demolish the stories so often told about the fabulous numbers of sheep and calves required to make
a single

A

these old errors.

book. Even modern works of scholarship continue to repeat Thompson, for example, 3 quotes an order by the

Countess of Clare in England in 1 3 24 for a copy of the 1/itae Pafrum, for which no fewer than 1,000 skins were allegedly required. At the current
price of 2 pennies per skin, the vellum alone would have cost the fabulous sum of 6. In fact an examination of the Vitae Patrum, whether in Latin

or in one of the contemporary French versions, quickly shows that when written in two columns the text generally fills about 150-160 leaves of
1 6 cm, or a total area amounting to no more than metres a dozen skins at the most.

25

cmx

6 square

At about the same time Treasury accounts 4 show that the price of paper was 2 sols 6 deniers for a quire of 'petite forme' (i.e. about 50 cm x 30 cm), which would be a denier and a half for a leaf measuring o. 1 5

Ig

metres square, while vellum, as

we have

seen,

was worth

a

maximum

of

24-26 deniers for a skin measuring o. 5-0.6 metres square, including the cost of shaving and preparation. While the difference is certainly appreciable,
it is

until the i5th century

tages,

from attaining the importance once assigned to it. In fact, paper did not seem to possess sufficient advanor perhaps was not marketed in large enough quantities, to
far

supplant parchment.

But was there an abundant supply of parchment? In France as in England its price remained reasonably stable from the second half of the
half of the ijth century, when book production was increasing rapidly, and this seems to prove that it was not such a rare commodity. It would be interesting to study the number of livestock,
1

4th to the

first

and of sheep in particular, to see if there was a corresponding increase over the same period. We do know that 300 years later, when vellum was no longer in general use, except in the copying of legal documents and for some industrial purposes, more than 100,000 bundles each containing 40 skins, were sold in France.
a year,

All of which does not mean, of course, that printing could have developed the way it did without paper. Even if a leaf of vellum would have passed through the press easily, the smallest edition of a work

would have consumed

several

hundred

skins,

even for

a

book of small

format. For larger sizes, thousands of skins would have been required. 6 Aloys Ruppel calculated that each volume of the Gutenberg Bible that

ing 42

was printed on vellum must have required 170 skins (340 leaves measurcm x 62 cm). The 30 or so copies produced in this way, therefore,

would have needed 5 ,000 skins. For the 100 copies printed on paper the equivalent on vellum would have used up 15,000 skins. Under such circumstances we can only wonder that so many luxury editions were printed on vellum in the i5th and i6th centuries, even though many
were Books of Hours of small
size.

in the Secular Period continued to copy the manuscripts needed for their own use, just as they had done in the 'monastic' they The rules of the monastic orders prescribed a certain number of period.

Monasteries

hours each day for intellectual work, and copying was an important part of this. Organised on traditional lines, the scriptoria 7 produced works of
learning and service books, and went on doing so until printing finally - and indeed beyond, for, as much relegated the manuscript to the past from tradition as necessity, monasteries still continued to copy missals,

Manuscripts

19

antiphonaries and breviaries until well into the i6th century. The predominant feature of the new period which began at the beginning of the 1 3th century was that the monasteries were no longer the sole producers

of books of all kinds and thenceforth scarcely produced more than were

needed for their

own
was

use.

Intellectual life

now

centred outside the monasteries, and

it

was

in the universities that scholars, teachers

operation with artisans

and students, working and craftsmen, organised an active book

in co-

trade.

Occasionally, and up until a later date in England than in France, a monastery where the art of calligraphy or illumination was particularly

with

well preserved would still be approached by a monarch or nobleman a request for a de luxe manuscript. The sale of these was a source of

income to the abbeys, but the practice grew rarer and rarer. John Lydgate, poet and monk of Bury St. Edmunds, who composed and copied texts in English which he sold to laymen until his death in 1446, was
an exceptional case. 8

From

the early i3th century, and even from the end of the izth, the

foundation of the

new

universities
it is

gave

rise to a

new
;

The hew

readers were,

true,

still

chiefly clerics

reading public. but for as long as

they were at university they were closely attached only to their college, their alma mater, and not to any other religious community.
professors needed texts for their courses, along with works of reference, and commentaries. In medieval education the gloss or com-

The

mentary on well established authorities was all important in every field of learning. It was therefore indispensable for them to have these works
conveniently to hand, and the university would have to provide a library where they could consult them. But it was not always possible to secure texts already in existence, and so the need arose for the establishment of workshops where professional craftsmen, employed by the university, could copy essential texts expeditiously and cheaply. This did not exclude the use of libraries which existed outside the university, where many rare and useful works could often be found. The loan of books had long been an established practice in the Middle Ages, and various church foundations, such as monasteries and chapters,

loaned out works which they would not have agreed definitively to
relinquish by selling them to the new university libraries. Despite the importance of oral instruction, the students too required a

few

essential books.

Even

if,

for

much

of the time, they took notes
still

at

lectures

and trusted to

their

memory, which medieval methods of
needed

education must have served to develop considerably, they

20

were

had no time to copy them for themselves and done for them, they could order them from who appeared in increasing numbers around the professional copyists, universities. In each university town a Guild of Scriveners or Stationers

some

rich

basic books. If they enough to have

it

to be formed, consisting of clerks in holy orders and also often of laymen the booksellers were laymen, while the scriveners were usually
:

came

clerks.

Both were assimilated into the university
:

as a clerical

branch and

enjoyed certain privileges in particular exemption from some taxes and from duties of watch and ward, together with the right to be tried by the
university courts (this being the privilege of committimus which goes back in their case to the beginning of the i3th century). 9

the price for their privileges, the booksellers, copyists and 'staterm dates back to classical antiquity and was first revived in the Italian universities) had to accept strict control by the university.
tioners' (the

As

As

the servants of a

body of scholars which extended
free, as

them, they were not
selves.

The way

their

work

its protection over ordinary craftsmen were, to work for themwas organised was a constant reminder that

they were carrying out what we should call a 'service'. Numerous documents, 10 the chief ones dated 1275, 1302, 1316, 1323 and 1 342, give us a fairly precise idea of th^ir duties. They were appointed
after a preliminary

enquiry to confirm their good standing and profesin the

sional ability,

and they had to furnish guarantees and take an oath

presence of the university authorities.
strictly laid

Once

installed, their duties

were

not so

down and their activities controlled. The booksellers were much retailers as custodians of books. Because of their scarcity,

manuscripts were sold and resold through successive generations of students and teachers. This second-hand market employed the bookfor the vendor, as an he had to to intermediary. security pledge get his appointment his and sell He could only under certain solvency. buy guaranteed conditions. He had to advertise publicly the titles he held in stock to
seller,

who was

usually

no more than an agent

The

prevent his making a profit out of an artificial scarcity. And he was remunerated for his labours according to a fixed rate of commission, not

being allowed to charge more than 4 deniers for the sale of a volume if the purchaser was a student or teacher at the university, 6 deniers if he

was

not.

Alongside the booksellers who simply sold books or acted as intermediaries in the sale of books, there were the 'stationers', whose role was more complicated and whose functions have recently been made
clearer

by the remarkable work of Father Destrez. Thanks to him we

Manuscripts

21

now know

in

some

detail the

mechanism of the
1 '

'taxation' of copies

and

of the circulation of the 'exemplaria' and, in general, of the institution of the pecia or the loan of sections of books.

To keep proper intellectual as well as economic control over the use of books, the authorities required all essential works to be scrupulously checked for textual correctness so that no errors might slip in, distorting
the sense.

To assure the reproduction of copies under the best conditions,

would be unaltered and the copyists could not make unjustified profits, the universities devised an ingenious system. Manuso that the text

were loaned which had been carefully checked and revised. From them copies-could be made and charged for according to a fixed tariff or 'tax'. The original text (the 'exemplar') was returned to the stationer after copying, and he could hire it out again. This method prevented the corruption of the text, which could otherwise become worse with every copy made, since by this method each copy was made from the same
scripts

original.
will

Anyone who has had to study the transmission of ancient texts understand what a good idea this was. The stationers, apart from multiplying copies themselves, loaned the

copy-text or exemplar to students who either wished to copy it or have it copied by the authorised copyists. It did not go out as one book, but

could be making copies from same manuscript simultaneously. The hiring charge for each quire was determined by the university, and stationers were forbidden to increase it. Moreover they had to loan them to anyone wanting to copy them. If an exemplar was known to be imperfect it was withdrawn from circulation. A number of exemplars have come down to us, often written in a large hand and very worn because of constant use. Since they were
in quires (peciae], so that several copyists

the

made to a consistent standard they had the added advantage of providing
a reliable

scribed,

and so made

measurement of the quantity of text that a copyist had tranit easier for clients and authorised copyists to agree

on a price. The system thus established for the multiplication of texts lasted until the close of the Middle Ages. In Paris, for example, it was within the framework of such an organisation that printing was introduced, under the auspices of the university. As far as the authorities were concerned, the printing press simply represented a handy means of multiplying indispensable texts even more rapidly and accurately than was possible
under the pecia system.

The

first

Paris presses, as

we

shall see,

were

set

up not so much

to.

turn

out the basic university texts of the Schoolmen as to produce a plentiful

22

supply of the classical authors, and the examples of a pure Latin prose

which were particularly in demand. Thepecia system seems to have answered most normal requirements quite easily. Even before scribal workshops were fully developed in the late 1 2th and early 1 3th centuries,
style

Latin texts of Aristotle had spread across Europe: 12 more than 2,000 copies of Aristotle's works have come down to us from the i3th and
1

that the
if

4th centuries. If we include those that have disappeared, it is evident works of an author of his standing were widely known and that,
the spread of ideas

was slow,

it

was nonetheless

effective.

The

role of

memory must not be underestimated in all this. Teaching was conceived in such a way that it could not but develop the memory. Remember that even now a Muslim child of 2 is supposed to be able to recite the whole
1

of the Koran by heart, surprising though it might seem to us. Still, it was difficult to assemble all the books needed for research.

While Raoul de Presles was preparing

his translation

of The City of God,

he collated no fewer than 30 manuscripts and 200 different works to compose his commentaries, in order to make his edition as 'critical' as 3 But a note found in a possible. manuscript of the i4th century testifies
1

to the difficulties encountered in the search for a given text: 'I have handed over 14 sols to the scribe who wrote this and 10 deniers to the

inn-keeper, and to the person who found the exemplar for me in the inn, 2 sols'. This tip for the person who told him of a copy to be found in

an unexpected place recalls the book expeditions of Richard de Bury, author of the Philobiblion. We need not exaggerate, however, the difficulties

of scholars in the i4th or

1

5th century;

it

was simply

that texts

were much scarcer than they were to be after printing took over. The information we have about libraries in the ijth and i6th centuries
(discussed below, p. 263
ff.)

gives us an idea of

how

the situation

improved.

While new methods were being used

in the universities to

supply as

the required 'learned' works as possible, there remained the problem of producing popular or recreational literature. A new reading public emerged in the late i3th century, with the slow and gradual

many of

change from feudalism. A bourgeois class was appearing alongside the nobility and the clergy, equally capable of developing a literary culture.
Lawyers, lay advisers at Court, state officials and, later on, rich merchants and town citizens - all needed books, not only in their own subjects like law, politics or science, but also works of literature, edifying moral
treatises,

romances and

translations. This kind of material

was not

Manuscripts

2)

although they were sometimes the authors, and works, at first in verse, then usually of out-dated works and translations of Latin or prose, adaptations medieval classics were soon produced. To distribute them, and satisfy
intended for
it

clerics,

was

in the vernacular. Original

the the

demands of a growing reading book trade.

public, required a reorganisation of

Any

history of French literature will confirm that writings in the

French language were already extant by the izth century. But the means of dissemination were a different matter. The literature of the day was
all to be recited or read aloud to an audience, since the reading public was not large enough to warrant any other form of publication. It may seem surprising that a large body of traditional

meant above

literature

written culture that
to understand the

could develop in such conditions. We are so permeated by our it is not easy to make the effort of imagination needed

manner in which oral culture perpetuates itself,

despite

the fact that
cultures.

we have evidence on the subject from many contemporary Perhaps the new media of our age, broadcasting and the cinema,

help us grasp how ideas and works can be transmitted without passing through the medium of print.

may

In the

nth and

i2th centuries

little

was read

in the vernacular but

were composed in it. M. Faral 14 has shown convincingly how many thejong/eurs on their travels from chateau to chateau singing and reciting their poems, romances and lives of the saints - in verse because it was easier to memorise - often composed their own material. The names
texts

'trouveres'

creators of literature the minstrel,
;

and 'troubadours' give us an indication of their roles as on the other hand, attached to a great

household, worked only for the lord and his household, to whom he addressed the poems which he either recited from stock or composed
himself.

The circumstances

in

strained to practise their craft posed impossible for these writers to retain

which the early men of letters were consome delicate problems. It was

any literary rights in their work unless they jealously kept the text of their compositions to themselves. But if they did that it was impossible for them to enjoy the satisfaction

every

possible.

work to as large an audience as demands had to be reconciled according The best solution was to find a patron, as writers had done in ancient Rome. To him the author could offer his work, in which he included, if need be, flattery of the benefactor and his
artist

seeks by broadcasting his

conflicting to the author's material needs.

The two

family. Failing that he could teach the words of his other jongleurs for a fee, or sell them copies.

poems and songs

to

24

By

the late i3th

and

early i4th centuries

we become aware

of a more

emergence of a large public of readers as well as listeners. Henceforward authors could write (or compile) their works without worrying about how they would be communicated to their public. The surest way to success was still through the patron. By
specialised audience, of the

getting a king, prince or great nobleman to accept a dedication, and presenting him with a de luxe edition, the writer secured not only the
virtual certainty of material

reward for

his pains,

but a good chance of

seeing his composition becoming a popular success. Fashion is set at the top and snobbery is a feature of every age. If the public knows a translation has not only been accepted but requested by the king of France, it is almost inevitable that the translation will be widely in demand and

more copies will be requested from the author. He can then have made by a scribe from his own master copy and thus become his own publisher. Boccaccio, for example, 15 in a letter to his friend Maghinardo dei Cavalcanti, which accompanied his gift of a de
that

another copy

luxe copy of his latest works, explains how it stayed in his hands a long time after completion because he did not know to whom he might offer it. Finally, he sends it to his friend so that he may let his relations have
the pleasure of reading it after him, and after that may 'publish' it abroad (emittat in publtcum}. In fact, this seems to have been one of the tacitly

understood functions of the patron, because in the dedication of his De claris mulieribus (On Famous Women] to Andreina Acciajuoli, Boccaccio
writes
:

'If

you think

it

good

to give
I

my book
once

in public (procedendi in publicum) then,

it is

courage enough to appear spread abroad (emissus)
all

under your auspices,
wishers.'

it

will,

believe, rise

above

the insults of

ill-

For authors more concerned about material
the possibility of keeping a copy-text of their

benefits, there

was always

book and

selling further

copies

made from it, and sometimes we hear of authors running what amounts to their own publishing concern, as did Jean Wauquelin of Mons. 16 Sometimes they used an agent or bookseller, as when Jean Golein sent a copy-text of his translation of Guillaume Durand's
Rational to the bookseller Henri de Trevou,

who

sold

it

in 1395 to the

Duke

of Orleans' valet for his master
earlier. 17

'in his

name and on

behalf of

M.

Jean Golein'. This translation had been made by Jean Golein for Charles

V

twenty years

The system of patronage was widespread in the i4th and i5th centuries, at least as a method of launching a new work. This explains the
difference

between the sometimes considerable sum paid out by
first

a

king

or prince to an author for a

edition or presentation copy of a recent

Manuscripts

2}

work, and the much lower price which later copies fetched, even if de luxe. From the economic viewpoint the author's rights may be considfirst edition, even if it only consisted of a single copy, since thereafter he had no rights in his work. Hence to some extent the patronage system allowed literary men to live by the pen; the price paid by the author was his obligation not to say anything displeasing to

ered to be vested in that

same time trying to write to please a growing Books were even quite frequently produced by express command. Charles V, for example, rewarded a number of translators. When, in the hope of encouraging certain political reforms, he wanted to have his advisers and state officials read Aristotle's Politics, Economics and Ethics, he had them translated for that purpose by Nicole Oresme
his patron, while at the

public.

18

between 1369 and 1372. 19 Once the work had been completed and offered in its 'first edition' to the patron who had ordered it, or at least accepted it as a gift, later
publication was arranged through the copyists and booksellers. The author participated in the process at least in the early stages, though under conditions that are still rather obscure. He appears to have had

no greater financial interest in ensuring the speedy circulation of his work than the troubadours had in the previous century, because once it had left him it was out of his hands. Yet he had no desire to remain in total obscurity. He had to find a balance between these two opposing
interests.

We

the universities, but

are ill-informed about the organisation of the book trade outside we know that book dealers who were appointed by

the university could do business with private individuals, and that they were not then subject to the same regulations (this we deduce from the regulations' silence on the subject). It is quite certain that, from the end
2th century in France and the early i4th century in England, 20 workshops were in existence employing copyists to produce books in

of the

1

the vernacular to be sold just as printed books are today. Even members of the aristocracy who maintained their own scriptoria were willing to make use of such sources. The Due de Berry, for example,

frequently ordered de luxe editions from the artists domiciled with him and in his pay, also purchased equally fine copies of manuscripts from booksellers. We know for example that in 1403 he acquired a manuscript of the Arthurian tales in prose from a bookseller called Raoul du Montet. 21 The surviving records reveal that the book was bought from a bookseller and not executed by command proof that the clientele with a taste for de luxe editions was large enough for a stationer to order a manuscript to be prepared at considerable expense (it was sold for 300
:

who

26

gold ecus) without a definite buyer in view. With an increase in this kind of clientele producing an increase in demand, copyists and associated craftsmen concerned in the making of books were prompted to rationalise their

production methods to improve productivity. Long before this, a degree of specialisation had developed in the monastic scriptoria. Some monks specialised in copying, others in
illumination, according to their talents. But scribe and illuminator still worked side by side in constant collaboration. In the secular age, how-

ever,

it

became more and more

common

for separate

workshops to be

set up,

with copyists in one shop, rubricators perhaps in another, and

illuminators in another.

came
had

Thus quite recognisable production lines slowly into being, involving a large number of artisans, each of whom
then, the

his specific task.

raw material on which everything else depended was workshops of the copyists. Treasury accounts show that the vellum, which was usually bought in the crude state (parchemin froutiri), passed through the hands of specialist craftsmen whose job was to thin it, shave it and bleach it. The payment of each is usually listed separately. When one artisan had written the text, another (the rubricator) added the initial letters or the chapter headings. A further specialist would do any fine capitals that might be required, whether they were coloured, illuminated or historiated. He would not even read the text, and so, in order to avoid any delay or doubt, the copyist would

By

rarely prepared in the

letter

inscribe a small guide letter in the blank space reserved for the initial, a known as the lettre d'attente (literally the 'waiting letter'). Thus we

have proof that the work was done in stages. The illumination, if it was required, came next. This art has been studied in some depth and thanks
to the

work of Henri Martin we have long had
craft organisation; 22

of

its

but here

we

will confine

considerable knowledge our account to a

demonstration of how, in
introduce
serial

this field as well,

attempts were

made

to

production.

The
latter

The

was separate from the copyist's, though the artist with an indication of the illustrations he wanted. the supplied instructions he placed in the margin have generally disappeared in
illuminator's atelier
:

our surviving manuscripts, though Leopold Delisle 23 has tracked down numerous examples. They seem to have been very brief- for example 'a

Pope on his throne'; 'two monks'; 'a lady on horseback'. The chief artist would first take charge and decide in greater detail what scenes and 24 If the manuscript was not too expensive portraits were to be drawn. he would be content to do a rapid sketch in pencil to help his pupils

Manuscripts

27

compose their pictures, according to rules which were well understood and which they had put into practice a thousand times before. Thus an
illuminator's atelier at the beginning of the 1 5 th century could produce both a masterpiece like the great Book of Hours known as the 'de

master
to

Rohan' and mass-produced works in which the general style of the is recognisable but which are obviously hack copies. And, once

work was completed, still more specialists might be required do the backgrounds if the style employed demanded the use of special techniques if, for example, it called for backgrounds of burnished gold,
the main

with or without scrollwork or stippling, or of chequerboard patterns.

Given

this multiplicity and complexity of operations, it has frequently been emphasised that the production of a single book involved a colossal amount of work. Such a view is justified, but we must not generalise

too readily. The supreme luxury article, a work of art in itself, designed for admiration rather than use - like the sumptuous books belonging
to the Due de Berry, the greatest bibliophile of his day took months if not years of work and cost a fortune. But many other books were also being turned out (editions of the Book of Hours, for example, whose use spread everywhere in Europe in the i4th and 1 5th centuries) which were

-

within reach of clients of modest means, and yet were illuminated and decorated. The trade in these Books of Hours was the virtual monopoly

of certain specialist workshops, and in these, above all, an ingenious division of labour allowed time to be saved and made possible proper

mass production. Ateliers of
Delaisse has

this

kind existed in Flanders, and M.

shown how

illuminators

would produce

identical stock

scenes for each of the main religious festivals (the Nativity, the Annunciation, etc.), while scribes copied out the different calendars of the

various dioceses, so that they could then be joined on to those sections of the Book of Hours which did not vary from diocese to diocese.
several copies

Illuminators even perfected a process which permitted them to make from one original. As Henri Martin has shown, a kind of

tracing paper (carta lustra) with a resin base century which allowed identical copies to be

was

in use

from the i4th

made of a

single 'cartoon'

or design. There were frequent cases of quarrels and even brawls between illuminators accusing each other of stealing the original cartoon, a
priceless resource.

Nor were methods

Hours. Manuscript 117/120 in tains tales from the Arthurian cycle,

Books of the Bibliotheque Nationale, which conlike this confined to

is an exact replica of a manuscript in the Library of the Arsenal. Foliation, the subjects of the illustrations,

2*
the breaks in the text to leave space for illustrations are all identical. discovery made in Holland by M. Lieftinck and announced at the Congres
des Sciences Historiques

A

by M. Samaran

in 195

5

25

gives us an idea of the

productive capacity of the workshops using methods like this. In a manuscript at the University of Leyden (B.P.L. 138), which contains a collection of texts known as the Auctores Octo and was written in 1437,
there
is

a reference in

Flemish to an order from someone

who was almost

certainly a wholesale bookseller to the chief copyist in a workshop. The order is for a large number of copies of different texts which went to

make up

a

little

manual used

in the Faculty

of Arts

:

200 copies of the

Seven Penitential Psalms, 200 copies of Cato's Disticha in Flemish, 400 copies of a small prayerbook. Figures as large as this amount to true
editions.

So, from the mid- 1 3th century, copyists were forced to improve their methods to meet the growing demand, and this in turn led in some workshops to something very like standardised mass production. By

using theptcia system they succeeded in multiplying university textbooks while avoiding the dangers of reproducing copying mistakes in manuscript after manuscript.
ateliers

Through the

rationalisation of work in the large

they were able to produce great quantities of manuals, elementextbooks and literary works (translations, prose adaptations of the tary chivalric epics, courtly romances). Most frequent of all were those
since they
in 1356,
this

devotional works without which no bourgeois household was complete, were commonly offered as a marriage gift. Even before it was
printed in so

many editions,
:

was widely reproduced
in

the Travels of Sir John Mandeville, completed in manuscript. 250 copies survive to

day

many languages

in English, 50 in Latin,

73 in German and Dutch, 37 in French, 40 not to speak of Spanish, Italian, Danish, Czech

Irish translations. All were circulating in the early 1 5th century. 26 All things considered, the work of copyists and scriveners paved the way for the printers. On the eve of the appearance of the first printed

and

growing demand for books was obvious, particularly among the emergent social classes, the merchants and the bourgeoisie, who were themselves, in the first half of the 1 5th century, the inventors and the
texts a

beneficiaries

of many radical new techniques (for example, the blast

furnace). Printing, which was essentially a technical development, was to have repercussions which could not have been foreseen in its early
stages.

The aim of the pages
what were

that follow

is

to

show how

printing

came

into being and

its effects,

both immediate and unforeseen.

Preliminaries:

The

i

Introduction of

Paper into Europe
Why did the first printed books appear when they did, about the middle of the jth century? Why was it that everywhere, from Avignon to
i

Mainz, from Haarlem to Strasbourg, men were exercising their ingenuity on the problem of producing multiple copies of manuscripts by
mechanical means? Were the reasons purely intellectual? Certainly the scholars of the day, those great readers we call humanists, were constantly

few and scattered copies of ancient texts which lay in the libraries. Surely they dreamt of some new technique which would enable them to publish large numbers of copies at low cost. Without
in pursuit of the

such a pressing motive no one might have begun searching for the solution that came with printing. Certainly, at the beginning of the
1 5th century, a period when so many changes were in gestation, men were forced more and more to think about improving the supply of manuscripts to meet the rising level of demand. From the time of the

creation of universities in the

1

ing need to

own more and more manuscripts.

3th century there had developed a growYet, despite the revival of

scholarship and education, there had only been minor improvements in the manuscript industry, like the pecia system which reduced the time the precious master copy was taken out of circulation, and the use of

abbreviations to increase the speed of writing. Books, however, depended on the human hand.

still

The necessary

resources to

make mechanical reproduction

possible

were not yet available. Perhaps what was essentially lacking was the technique of making moveable tvpe. An individual letter (a 'sort') requires a metal punch which is used to strike a matrix with great
precision in a block of less hard metal. Individual letters are then cast from the matrices, and have to be made from the proper alloy - all of which indicates why the new art was developed by goldsmiths. But there

was nothing to prevent

it

Similarly, all the processes covered

having been developed in the i4th century. by the term presswork, i.e. the com(if,

posing of the type, the inking, and the operation of the press
29

that

is,

a press

was

really necessary)
if

could well have been developed before

Gutenberg

there had been an absolute need for them. But the im-

portant thing was missing. What we call the printing 'industry', a term used since the introduction of mechanised printing in the early igth century, was in origin an artisan's trade dependent on one primary material without which it

would have been impossible, namely paper. What use would it have been to be able to print with moveable type if the only medium was skin, which takes ink poorly, and when only the costliest skin, that of the calf, was flat and supple enough to be used under the press? It would have
been impossible to invent printing had it not been for the impetus given by paper, which had arrived in Europe from China via the Arabs two
centuries earlier and

came

into general use

by the

late i4th century.

I

The Progress of Paper
new kind of 'parchment' made its introduced by merchants trading with Arab countries. Paper did not have the same surface qualities as parchment. It was more fragile and had a rag base, reminiscent of cotton in appearwas
in the izth century that a
in
Italy,

It

appearance

it was thought to be made of cotton), and it tore was easily. thought of as an ersatz product, but it finally won and was even acceptance thought to have advantages for some purposes when a document was not intended for preservation or for letters, rough drafts or documents being minuted for later engrossment. So the notaries of Genoa, where paper first made its appearance from Arab Spain, used it for their accounts and would sometimes use old Arabic manuscripts for scribbling things in the margins soon whole bales of paper were arriving in Italian ports. Occasionally the new material was in use at the Chancelleries of various European states. But fear of its

ance (for a long time

At

first it

:

;

and the risk of it perishing made rulers proscribe its use for the making of charters. Roger of Sicily in 1 145 ordered that all charters on carta cuttanea made in the time of his predecessors were to be recopied on parchment and then destroyed, and in 1231 the Emperor Frederick II
fragility

forbade the use of paper to record public Acts. 28 Despite such edicts

paper gained ground and paper mills were started in Italy. There were several papermakers near Fabriano in the early i4th century. Two

Preliminaries: The Introduction of Paper into Europe

31

development of the industry in that area, the same which were to aid the spread of papermaking in the whole of western Europe. The first was technical. As early as the nth century, if not before, there had existed a device to transform the rotary action of a
factors assisted in the factors
mill into a reciprocal

improvement revolutionised
it

movement by means of levers. This technical a number of early industries. At Fabriano

allowed the papermakers to replace by mallets the old grindstones

which the Arabs used to pulverise rags and so to increase output, reduce costs, and produce paper of superior quality. 29 The second factor was the extended cultivation of flax and hemp at the close of the Middle Ages, and the substitution of linen for wool in the making of underwear. This made for a rag base in paper that was less costly and more plentiful just at the time when paper was coming into general use. With such factors in its favour, the Fabriano trade enjoyed increased prosperity and in 1354 Bartolus the jurist commented on 'the famous town' near Ancona where the best paper was made. The drive to improve quality and quantity made the manufacturers seek better methods, and not only were they the first to use mallets instead of the old grindstone,

now improved the adhesive properties of their pulp by subanimal stituting glue and gelatine for the vegetable glues used by the Arabs, which had hitherto given paper its cotton-like finish. Great care was taken over the finish, a job for specialist workmen, and each manubut they
factury used its own watermark, a conventional and often symbolic sign, to identify its products. This device marked the adaptation of the new

conformed with European conventions. 30 In the second half of the fourteenth century, papermakers began to feel restricted at Fabriano and spread to Voltri, Padua, Treviso and Genoa. They soon established two other major centres of production, in the region of Liguria around Genoa, and around Lake Garda, then part of the Venetian Republic. Italian merchants, and particularly the
so that
it

medium

Lombards, were the prime promoters of paper throughout Europe. Briquet in his masterly work Les Filigranes shows that the watermark of a winged eagle was common not only in Italy but also in Spain, Holland and Belgium between 1362 and I386, 31 and about 1365 the journal kept by Lodovico di Ambrogio, a papermaker of Fabriano, tells us that he was selling his product in Fano and Perugia. His travels took him by way
of a small port on the Tuscan coast called Talamona to Venice and, by way of Aigues-Mortes, to Montpellier. On the 23rd November, 1365,
learn that he exported 20 bales of paper weighing 1,333 kilos to Montpellier. In three and a half years he shipped 240 bales, or 14,175

we

kilos,

32 through the port of Talamona.

time paper was beginning to replace parchment everywhere. In By the late i3th century it was already in use for official purposes in the south of France. It was in use in 1 248 by the notaries of Marseilles and
this

same year by the commissioners of Languedoc. From 1243-8 the commissioners of Alphonse of Poitiers used it, and in Toulouse the
in the

records of the royal commissioners were kept on paper from 1272 to 1274. Shortly afterwards it was to be found in general use in Switzerland

and
still

at the

ing through the Low Countries and Germany, while in Venice by the business community already went back a long time.

was gradually adopted in northern France. There, the secretaries Chancellery in 1340 used a minute book made of paper, which is preserved in the Public Record Office in Paris." Its use was spreadit

its

use

Furthermore, papermaking was established outside Italy when Italian merchants abroad, anxious to expand their trade, encouraged skilled craftsmen to leave Italy to teach their trade elsewhere in anticipation of
increased demand. In the Troyes region, at Comtat Venaissin, and around
Paris at Corbeil, Essones

and

St.

making plants appeared was self-supporting, while the Champagne region actually developed an 34 Italy continued to be the main supplier of Spain, export business. the Low Countries, Austria and Germany, even though mills England,
were already
a
in existence in

in the i4th century,

Cloud we know that primitive paperand by the mid- 1 5th France

Germany,

as they

were

in Switzerland.

Only

were working in Germany at the time of the invention of But warehouses were storing Italian paper in all the great printing. commercial centres, and the last lingering prejudice against paper had
mills

few

a long time,

disappeared nearly half a century earlier, even if manuscripts were, for still inscribed on vellum. Was this habit? Probably, but also

preference for a tried and tested material, when permanence was the prime requirement. It was this that influenced Gerson when he advised
against copying texts on paper in 1415 because it was less durable than vellum. 35 By that time, however, such advice was little more than an

expression of nostalgia, since paper had already won the day. One of the indispensable preconditions of the printed book had now been realise'd.

Preliminaries: The Introduction of Paper into Europe

2

Preconditions of the Growth of Paper-Making Natural and Industrial

:

Before examining the characteristics of those areas which became centres for the manufacture of paper to supply the printing press, the influence

which the location of paper mills had on the location of printing shops and the impetus that the new invention of printing gave the paper trade, let us first determine what preconditions were necessary to the setting

up of a paper

mill.

Firstly, exactly is paper made? The process scarcely changed from the i4th to the i8th century - the replacement of the mallets by cylinders, which took place at the end of the iyth century, being the only 6 major development. 3 The raw material used, old rags, was obtained from specialised dealers, who collected it and brought it to the mill, where it was then sorted. For the best quality paper, printing paper

how

particularly, a flimsy white rag was essential and it had to be separated from the tougher fabrics. After the sorting came the steeping of the rags, which were chopped into small pieces and left in selected places, usually
cellars, to ferment. In this process the fatty substances were forced out and the cellulose gradually separated. The raw stuff" was then brought to the mill, usually a water mill which had been used to grind corn before
its

conversion for papermaking. In the milling machine the main shaft
little

levers which brought the small wooden mallets into operation, pounding up and down in the beating troughs which contained the

had

treated rags.

The

mallets

employed

in the preliminary, reducing, stages

of this process were

with nails or tiny knives. The rags were finally reduced in water containing a carefully measured quantity of soap, to produce a paste of determinate thickness which
fitted

ended

- a wooden frame perature. Into this vat there was then inserted a form a lattice of brass water to drip away wires which allowed the encasing
while retaining a layer of pulp. The form was shaken to distribute the pulp evenly before drying. After they had begun to dry, the sheets which
resulted

as pulp.

This was fed into a vat of

warm

water of a fixed tem-

were pulled away by a workman called a coucheur who spread felt that absorbed more water. Next, the sheets of paper and felt were repeatedly squeezed under a tight press and then the sheets were again taken to the 'little' hanging room where they dried in the air.

them on

However,

sheets used in this state

would drink up ink and so they

14

needed coating with a size, which gave a smooth finish. Lastly, the sheets were dried in a 'great' hanging room, and were sent for final texturing, and finishing with flint. The paper was gathered into reams of 2 5 sheets,

and into bundles of 20 reams,
market.

after

which

it

was ready for delivery

to

paper, water was essential, and pure water at that. It was needed to turn the beaters, and to make the pulp. According to Briquet one kilo of paper would need some 2,000 litres of water. Janot, another
litres

To make

expert, says that even today to make 300 kilos of paper an hour 200,000 of water are required, or 700 litres an hour per kilo. 37

Such water must
it

fulfil

certain requirements.

Some

rivers never

made

is

easy for the mills along their banks to make paper because their water often stained brown if it has a high iron content, is muddy, or is full

of organic impurities. The water has to be limpid and pure. So manufacturers erected their mills upstream rather than downstream from
towns, to eliminate various kinds of detritus. For the same reason they were often situated on the higher reaches of the large rivers or on the middle reaches of their tributaries. Such sites could also be ideal sites
for water propulsion the upper reaches of a river, being narrow and winding, make it easier to cut a secondary channel (generally a chord subtending a curve) or to channel the river directly to drive the mill. It
;

is

noticeable that the

first
is

papermakers

settled in limestone regions,

while today such water
disadvantages were
less

not favoured for papermaking. Evidently the important then than now and were more than
for the

compensated
In fact

for by the
rivers

many

abundance of clear water. combined the characteristics required
:

establishment of paper mills. In France the important centres are on the edge of mountain regions in the Auvergne, at Thiers,

we
;

find

Ambert
and
in

and Chamalieres

;

in the

Vosges, around

St.

Die and Epinal

Angoumois and on

the plains of

Champagne.

- sometimes near the sea to facilitate exbeing established near towns but in that at a case ports, port, like Genoa, where rag collection was also
easy. Again,
it

Still more important, and more of a worry to the first papermakers, was the supply of rags. To make a decent paper a great quantity of old rags or rope was needed. Hence the search for fabrics naturally led to mills

was no coincidence

that mills

were started

in centres of

Preliminaries : The Introduction of Paper into Europe

)j

linen manufacture, such as the Vosges, where there were other favourable conditions, and in Champagne and the Dauphine, where the exten-

sion of the cultivation of

hemp encouraged papermaking

in the i8th

century at Bourgoin, St. -Jean-en-Royans,Tullins,DomeneandPeyrus. 39 As the trade grew, so rags became scarcer and had to be found farther
afield.

Hence the increasing importance of the rag and bone men - the collection of old clothes became lucrative business from the 1 5th to the
1

money, or with pins

8th centuries. In the Vosges collectors paid for old rags either with (1588), and later with crockery. They worked for

second-hand dealers with businesses near the mills

who

did a rough

sorting of the rags before selling them. At first rags would be gathered from the immediate neighbourhood of the mill, but by the end of the
1 6th century ragmen from the Vosges were at work at Metz and Pont-aMousson and in Burgundy. In another papermaking region, that of Toulouse, Antoine de Laugeriere made his fortune in the first third of

the

1

6th century selling rags by the ton.

Many

carters

were

also rag

collectors. 40

The Vosges and Toulouse were, however, relatively minor industrial At Troyes, merchants came to the fairs in Champagne with loads of rags. Once the Auvergne centre developed, the best rags wagon
centres.

- from Burgundy were sent up the River Saone to Lyons where
carriers,

carts

waited to transport them. Auvergne carriers, especially the Forez

were carting loads from

as far afield as

41 Velay and Nivernais.

To ensure supplies and prevent the
prices,

rag collectors demanding exorbitant

papermakers appealed to the State to grant them monopolies in rag collection. In 1 366 they obtained at Treviso a privilege of this type from the Venetian Senate, and in 1424 a manufacturer, originally from
Fabriano and working in Genoa, secured a monopoly on the collection
of old rope. In the 1450*5, the papermakers of Genoa complained they were under the thumb of the rag merchants and sought to prosecute them. In Switzerland, where mills sprang up in the Basel region, similar

had to be taken to protect the local industry and the authorities decided that for 24 hours after rags were put on sale only customers from
steps

Basel should be allowed to

Germany

it

buy them. was customary to mark out

When
a

the industry started in

zone around each town and

grant the right of rag collecting to the local papermakers. In 1622, for example, all rags collected in the Bremen area were reserved for the mills

of Bremervorde and Altkloster. 42

The shortage of basic raw

materials

was probably

felt later in

France

than elsewhere, but
industry
at

it

was

felt

there

more

acutely.

The

decline of the

Troyes

in the i6th

and iyth centuries appears to have been

caused initially by a critical shortage of rags. In 1674 Colbert, although aware of the problem and concerned at the decline in the industry, could
find no solution beyond stipulating that papermakers must keep their vats filled with rags! In the i8th century, reading and writing increased sharply and so there was a new crisis of supply and demand. So great was

the dearth of materials in the Auvergne in 1732 and 1733 that the export of rags from that region was forbidden. Moreover, in 1754, the ban was reinforced by refusing to allow the establishment of collecting depots

near the ports or frontiers.

crises.
it

Eventually it was clear that only new solutions would prevent chronic In 1719 Reaumur had suggested to the Academie des Sciences that

must be possible to make paper from wood. The German, Bruckmann, between 1727 and 1730 had copies of his Magnolia Dei in locis subterraneis printed on paper made from wood. In 1741 Jean-Etienne Guettard, a

member

of the Academie des

Sciences,

many

different kinds of material

-

began experimenting with

palm
;

leaves, esparto grass, aloes,

nettles, even mulberries and seaweed while John Strange in England and Schaffer in Saxony were carrying out experiments on similar lines.

In 1786, Leorier Delisle of Langlee published the works of the Marquis de Villette on paper made from marsh weed, and in England between 1 80 1 and 1804 attempts were made to commercialise similar processes; but all these were pioneer efforts. During the French Revolution paper

was consumed on a vast scale (one of the reasons for the disappearance of so many early French archives). But it was only in 1844 that the idea of mixing wood pulp with rag pulp was conceived by the bookbinder,
Gottlieb Keller. In 1847 Woelter took out a patent for this process. And it was only towards 1860 that straw was definitively and universally
applied as a substitute for rags in the manufacture of newspaper. So as long as rag remained the essential raw material of papermaking -

from the i4th to the i9th centuries - the expansion of the papermaking industry appeared forever threatened by lack of raw materials. At Troyes and perhaps Venice in the i6th century, in the Auvergne and Angoumois in the i7th and :8th centuries, papermakers were forced to sacrifice quality to quantity in face of the increasing demand. They had to use poor quality rag and consequently produced worse paper; customers complained and went elsewhere. New mills began in places where they

Preliminaries : The Introduction of Paper into Europe

37

far been found, near to centres of consumption. The story, in of the is that its was brief, papermaking industry development always conditional on the supply of its raw materials.

had not so

Commercial Factors
From
the i4th to the xyth centuries, in response to a growing demand, while shortage of raw material cramped development of the large centres,

new establishments were repeatedly founded in regions which until then had had nothing to do with paper making. In order to enable production to flow more easily, new centres were almost always situated at the
cross-roads of commercial routes, and
if

possible near large centres of

consumption.

Here again at the beginning, the Italians, because of their resources of and technical expertise, played an important part. By the late 1 5th century Italian production was no longer enough for European needs, and transport added considerably to the cost of such heavy goods: before delivery to French or German customers paper had to pass through three or four hands. Moreover Lombard merchants abroad were willing to finance the conversion of corn mills to make paper near the profitable markets of France, Switzerland and Germany, and they encouraged skilled craftsmen to leave Italy to teach the new art. So we see a Florentine setting up a small mill at Carpentras (i 374) and we hear of Italian merchants persuading workmen from the Pignerol region to come and start mills around Avignon at the beginning of the i5th 45 Local merchants sometimes invited Italians to do the job. In century.
capital

Ulman Stroemer of Nuremberg converted a corn and entrusted the instruction of the German workmen to three Italians, Francesco di Marchio, his brother Marco, and a servant. The Church was interested in the new industry and in 1466
1391, for example,
mill in Gleismiihl

Jean de Jouffroy, abbot of Luxeuil, permitted two Piedmontese to start a mill on the Breuchin, a tributary of the Lanterne, in return for annual

dues of four reams of paper. Before 1455, the chapter of St. Hilaire 46 The d'Angouleme had had its corn mill converted to make paper. universities naturally wanted to obtain supplies at the lowest possible
cost
in Corbeil, Essones, St.

and encouraged the setting up of Cloud and,

mills.

The

construction of mills

especially,
Paris.

around Troyes was

greatly encouraged

by the University of

The history of the paper mills supplying Paris is well known thanks to the works of Stein and Le Clert 47 which prove that the growth of a major industry was made possible by the proximity of an important centre of consumption, like Paris, to the cross-roads of a number of traderoutes, like Troyes. Let us take this as a typical example. The University
of Paris from the mid- 1 4th century wished to lay in stocks of paper
at

the best available rates and assigned the right to start factories at Essones and Troyes to Jean le Bon, their owners being exempted from taxes and
certain duties in their capacity as agents for the University. Nearer still to the capital, at St. Cloud, two citizens of Paris, papermakers, took the

bishop's mill on a long lease in 1376 to make at the said mill 'paper and other commodities such as may be profitable, except that they may not
:

at

any future time grind corn or cause to have ground any corn what-

soever'.

But the paper used

at Paris

came

largely

from Troyes. By way of the

had brought paper to the fairs of date, and via the Seine and its tributaries it could quickly be carried to Paris, the coastal towns and on to England. There was regular communication between Troyes and Flanders, and
Italians

Rhone and Saone rivers, Champagne from an early

Picardy like
it is

Champagne was renowned for its hemp.

In these conditions,

hardly surprising to hear of mills starting up along the Seine and its tributaries with the help of Italian money. From the end of the ijth
century, Champagne was supplying part of northern Europe, and it was there that Ulrich Gering bought his paper some 75 years later on - the

paper with the anchor watermark which was used in the

earliest

incun-

abula published in Paris. The same watermark is found in books printed in the Low Countries at Louvain and Delft and in Germany at

Mainz and Cologne.* 8

In Paris the paupeleurs or papermakers formed their own Guild in 1 398, and the papermakers of Troyes and Paris, who found that competitive

new

mills

were

in business all

round them, asked the Sorbonne

in 1415

to intervene to maintain their preferential status. Letters Patent of King Charles VIII dated 1489, confirming the rights of the University of Paris,
list

entitled to enjoy
1 1

those persons other than Masters, scholars and regents who are them they include 24 booksellers, 4 parchment makers,
:

papermakers (4 from Paris, 7 from Troyes, Corbeil and Essones), 2 illuminators, 2 scribes and 2 binders. For a long time the title 'Official Papermaker to the University' was greatly coveted by makers from

Preliminaries: The Introduction of Paper into Europe

39

Paris and Troyes, since it was a kind of noble title which conferred exemption from taxation and other substantial privileges which were jealously guarded by the University.

ment of paper

Everywhere, the presence of a large town encouraged the establishmills, and if Lyons had not happened to be close, with its

numberless printing presses, there would probably have been few paper mills in Beaujolais and probably none in the Auvergne. But often the
far from its place of manufacture. For example, Chamwas used in Flanders, the Low Countries and north pagne paper Germany from the i5th to the beginning of the i8th century, and Angouleme paper was used in Spain, England, Holland and the Baltic States in the i6th and iyth centuries. In addition the great production centres were to be found at commercial cross-roads. Despite their

paper was used

proximity to Paris and Lyons, the Troyes papermakers would not have been so numerous but for the fairs of Champagne, nor those of Auvergne

without the

fairs

of Lyons. Paper was a heavy commodity and so access

to river transport favoured the development of a centre of production, and proximity to a port was even more valuable. In the i4th century,
Italian

papermakers set up in the Venice and Genoa districts. In the i6th and i yth centuries, the case of Angouleme is even more striking. During

the English occupation of France in the early i jth century Italian paper had been exported to England via Bordeaux. Then a local industry

developed whose products were exported by way of La Rochelle and Bordeaux. As a consequence, at the end of the iyth century, when

Angouleme paper was famous for its quality, Paris stationers complained that they were obliged to import it overland and so had to pay more for 49 it than their Dutch competitors who received it by sea.

4

The Coming of Printing and
Paper Industry

the

Development of the

Aside from the introduction of the printed book, the demand for paper

was felt in many new fields: teaching spread, business transactions became more complex, writing multiplied and there was a growing need
for paper for non-literary uses, by tradesmen, haberdashers, grocers, chandlers. whole new species of trades was created which depended

A

on paper:

carriers,

box-makers, playing-card makers, bill-posters and

40

whose precise duties were never exactly demarcated, lawsuits between the rival Guilds. endless despite Yet the main customer was still the printer, the newest arrival. The
related trades

press was a huge consumer of paper, using 3 reams a day per press. In the 1 6th century (figures are impossible for the earliest period because there is little documentary evidence) there were at a conservative

estimate between 500 and 1,000 presses at work in France, so that paper mills had to supply anything from 1,500 to 3,000 reams a day to keep

them in production, which means 450,000 to 900,000 reams a year, if It is not surprising to find that one they were working at full capacity. of Gutenberg's associates owned a paper mill and that the richest men among the papermakers were those who supplied the booksellers, nor was it so surprising that their children were attracted to a career in books and took to printing. They reinvested in the printing of books the money they had made out of the production or sale of paper. Thus the development of papermaking centres favoured the development of printing centres. The entry of Charles VIII into his city of Troyes was celebrated in a verse - albeit a bad one - in which the papermaking trade has a
5 5
J

prominent place

:

-

Aussi furent de Troyes les papetiers En tres grand pompe, habillez de migraine Et si bien montez sur beaux puissants destriers De bordure couvert tres belle et saine. Pour y venir laisserent courir Seine, Leverent vanne, delaissant leurs moulins.

According to some, the author of the verse, a papermaker or relation of a papermaker, was one of the Le Be family. The career of this family was
typical in that a family

most

skilled punch-cutters

famous for its paper also produced some of the and letter founders of the i6th and iyth

centuries. 52

In 1405 one Guyot Le Ber (or Le Be) the elder, a papermaker, was tenant of a mill at St. Quentin near Troyes. Gradually the family

expanded the business and soon possessed several

mills.

The family were

appointed Official Papermakers to the University of Paris while also
continuing to sell their own products for profit. From 1470 to 1490 their paper was to be found from Paris to Dortmund, from Troyes to Canter-

Preliminaries: The Introduction of Paper into Europe

41

bury, from Heidelberg to Dijon, from Mainz to Utrecht and from Bruges to Cologne, all of it bearing the watermark B. Already rich in the
1 6th century, in the iyth they were ennobled. Nevertheless one of the famous Le Be sons, Guillaume, took up typography and punch-cutting, working with Robert Estienne from 1545 to 1550. Though knowing no Hebrew, he soon mastered enough to cut an alphabet then he left for Paris and Venice where he worked with the celebrated Aldus firm and
;

perfected his

art.

On his return to Paris he set up his letter foundry at the
St.-Jean-de-Beauvais at the sign

corner of

Rue St.-Jean-de-Latran and
ecritoire.

of the Grosse

There he engraved Hebrew letters for Estienne, and musical notation for Le Roy and Ballard. He founded the most

was also
1

distinguished dynasty of type founders in Paris and his son Guillaume II a papermaker, type founder, bookseller and printer in the early

7th century.

Nor

is

Le Be an

isolated

example of such inter-connections between
for in

the trades involved in

book production,

many places papermakers

days books sold slowly and often the paper they were printed on could only be paid for as and when they were sold, so that papermakers often acted as bankers to printers
invested

money

in publishing. In the early

and booksellers, while conversely publisher-booksellers would sometimes rent a mill whose product they used. Such was the case, for example,
in

Strasbourg where Andreas Heilmann, Gutenberg's associate,

owned

26, to the printer Kopfel and then, in 53 Towards to another Wendelin. 1550, 1535, Eustache Frosprinter, chauer, whose brother was the printer Christoph Froschauer of Zurich, a mill
later, in
1 5

which was rented

a lease of a mill in Zurich. When he died in 1549, Christoph took over the place in his name. 54 Eusebius Episcopus, the famous Basel printer, rented the Courcelles mill in the neighbouring county of Mont-

took

between 1575 and 1 5 87. In the later 1 7th century some Toulouse 55 and later still printers, the Boudes, operated a mill near the city, Beaumarchais acquired mills at Arches and Archettes while he was publishing Voltaire. Finally, in 1 789, the Didots bought the Essones mills where the first continuous-process papermaking machinery was to be
beliard

operated ten years later, as we shall see. Contact between the papermaking industry and the book trade was
other.
mills

and printing shops in Europe at different periods. When printing was first making its victorious way in the period from 1475 to 1560 Europe was becoming covered with paper mills.

always close the prosperity of either trade depended upon that of the To prove this, we have only to compare the 'distribution of paper
;

42

worth comparing the distribution of mills in had made at in in real a few mills were work FrancheLorraine, any impact, and at and Toulouse. There were Comte, Ambert, Perigueux only two at centres: at and Troyes important Avignon. By 1560, despite a slight decline from the beginning of the century, the Champagne region was still three times more important than it had been in 1475. The mills in the Vosges region also tripled and there were new ones in Brittany and Normandy. In the Angouleme area, which was to be so important in the 1 7th century, there was also a rapid expansion. Proximity to Lyons with its innumerable printing shops and its fairs had encouraged the growth of paper mills in the Beaujolais and especially the Auvergne. Gradually France eclipsed Italy as Europe's papermaker and most of the Strasbourg incunabula bear French watermarks, especially those of Champagne. For a long time the field remained open to the papermakers of Troyes and their imitators, for there was little competition from Germany,
demonstrate
this,
it is

To

1475 and 1560,

56 In 1475, before printing especially in France.

the
its

Low Countries or England. Even a small place like Bar-le-Duc sent paper along the Meuse as far as Brussels, Louvain, Utrecht and Zwolle where its paper figures in the earliest printed version of the
even went as
far as

A.rs moriendi, the Speculum humanae salvationis
it

Oxford where

it

and the Fasciculus temporum was employed in printing the
;

7 Canterbury Tales.*

However, paper mills did spread through the rest of Europe, even if not so rapidly as in France. In Switzerland, they appeared in the neighbourhood of Freiburg and, especially, of Basel, where the Italian family
settled. Around Basel in 1 570 there were seven paper mills supplying the town's printing presses. In Germany the first mill, at Gleismiihl, began work in 1391. By 1420

of Galliziani

there

was one

at

Liibeck and some time later at

Gennep near Cleves

(1428). In 1431 wehearofoneatLiineburg,ini46oat Augsburg, in 1469 at Ulm: and there were others elsewhere. Between 1480 and 1490 a mill

opened in Leipzig,
in

in 1482

one opened
at

in Ettlingen, in 1489 at

Landshut,

Reutlingen. Yet in general progress was slow and not until the mid- 1 6th century was Germany self-sufficient.

1490

at Breslau, in

1496

In 1516 Nordlingen, Augsburg and Nuremberg were still applying for help to Milanese financiers to help set up an industry, while in the West
the Rhineland towns,

of Germany they had recourse to France for their supplies. 58 Thus even where printing enjoyed such a spectacular career,

continued for a long time to import their paper. Curious as that may seem, the situation was even stranger in the

Low

Preliminaries : The Introduction of Paper into Europe

4}

Countries, where papermaking took still longer to grow. Plantin, for instance, used to send to Champagne for his paper^ and in the mid-iyth

century the Moretus firm were

still

buying paper from France; the

Elzeviers feared they might have to shut down their publishing house 60 following the end of business relations with France. They adopted
just to keep their presses working, and began in these iimos the teeth of many complaints from their producing learned customers. Dutch businessmen did nonetheless invest money in

their

famous small format

to the Baltic

Charenton mills and sold the product throughout Europe from England and from Spain to the Low Countries. Near Angouleme a

high-quality paper marked with the arms of Amsterdam was produced. In Louis XIV's reign, this paper, which left the kingdom as blank sheets

and therefore

free of tax, returned to

France in the form of books and
itself

pamphlets whose contents often displeased the King. But the need to manufacture paper on the spot eventually made
felt in

Holland, as elsewhere. When the States General forbade the importation of French paper in 1671, the Dutch set up their own mills. The need to improve quality and to adapt the methods of production to
the caprices of their national form of motive power, the wind, led to a new invention - the use of cylinders instead of mallets. This enabled

higher output and better quality. The new method soon spread to Germany. But it was not adopted in France until the end of the i8th
century, and this, for a long time, ensured

Dutch supremacy.
were
felt as late as

Despite suffering a great crisis

whose

effects

1725,

the French trade did recover and mills began to appear in Brittany, Dauphine and Champagne, and in the South- West and the North. But the

large

papermaking centres

in

the

Auvergne and Charenton never

recovered the place they had once held in the European markets. Each country had its own industry by this time and in Germany about 500
mills

were producing z l/2 million reams a year by the late i8th century. The Italian trade was still active at this time, and in England, where a very small number of mills were in operation in the i6th century, 100 were at

work
ville,

in 1696,

many begun by Huguenot
in

refugees. In 1722, 300,000

reams were made

who

first

England, and it was an Englishman, John Baskerhad the idea of making wove paper without wires or

chain lines, in 1750.

So the great increase in the numbers of paper mills coincided with the increased consumption of paper and the use of more and more printing

44
presses. Technical research played an important role in the period

when

modern industry was
century.

in gestation, while France,
fell

methods longer than other countries,

keeping to traditional behind in the early i8th

attempted to catch up. Desmarestz, a factory inspector, enlisted the aid of a Dutch-trained engineer called Ecrevisse in enit

Then

and the Montgolfiers (the first aeronauts). On 26th March 1789, on the eve of the French Revolution, the celebrated printing firm of Didot, who were already trying to improve technology, bought the mills at
Essones. Here ten years later, while research was proceeding in England and Germany to discover a way to replace the old hand press by modern

couraging selected entrepreneurs to adopt new methods. Some did, for example the Reveillons at Courtalin-Faremoutiers in Brie, the Johannots,

machinery, a book-keeper back from America called Louis-Nicolas Robert constructed the first papermaking machine. The time was ripe.

At the beginning of the i9th century, in order to satisfy the new needs and education, more books, administrative publications and, soon, newspapers were required, and consequently more paper had to be produced. Here lay the reason behind the mechanisation of the book and paper trades.
for information

The Technical
Problems and
Solution
How,
in the

their

middle of the

1

5th century, did

Gutenberg and

his

contem-

poraries succeed in mastering the many technical difficulties which the invention of printing must have posed? Through what stages did they have to pass (as far as we can ever know or guess) before reaching the

solution? What improvements were introduced into printing between 1450 and 1 800 ? How did these improvements help to strengthen printing and increase the diffusion of the book? These are the questions
final

we would
so

like to consider in the present chapter.

they are particularly hard to answer, although

we

For the early period are able to depend on

many meticulous

scholars, historians
:

and

specialists in the tradition

of Hain, Haebler and Proctor.

To repeat we are not concerned here with

problems of attribution, of the paternity of printing and its improvement,
so to speak. What we want to do, in so far as it is possible, is to show by what techniques the first incunabula were printed and how these techniques were gradually perfected in the 1 5 th and 1 6th centuries so that more books could be printed more rapidly. In other words we wish to show how books were first printed on the hand press from the i6th to the 1 8th centuries and then how a technical revolution was necessary

and early i9th century to keep pace with the demand for books and magazines.
in the late i8th

I

The Wood-Cut, Ancestor of the Book?
By the mid- 1 4th century paper was in use throughout Europe and before the end of that century had become a common commodity. This offered new possibilities, not because of its price, which in fact dropped only slowly, but because it was possible to manufacture large quantities of the new material possessing a perfectly plane surface; hence it was an
ideal

medium

for mass production of pictures and texts.

V

46

A standardised method of making pictures was well known by the
century and
it

i4th

was used to decorate bindings with designs impressed into leather by means of an engraved (intaglio] plate. In manuscripts the great ornamental capitals which rilled the space left by the copyist at the head of each chapter and paragraph were occasionally made with small embossed stamps made of wood or metal. The technique of block printing of patterns on cloth had come from the East and was used to impress designs on silk or linen fabrics and to produce simple devotional 61 pictures and religious scenes using coloured inks. Paper was well
printing, printing on paper stamps gave a cleaner and more exact line, whether in black and white or in colour. The earliest examples of xylography, or woodcut printing, known to us are pulls taken on paper of

suited to this process.

Compared with fabric

with embossed

(relief)

designs intended for cloth they appeared only a short time after paper had come into common use in Europe, that is, about 70 years before the printed book. They pointed towards a method which might be
:

appropriate for the printing of script. The first block prints go back to the end of the i4th century and per-

haps earlier

we know there was a thriving trade in them along the Rhine 62 The new process made possible a multiplication of religious pictures and needed only simple equipment, a block of wood and a knife. It proved enormously successful at a time when religious
;

and

in

Burgundy.

observance was
in a

at the centre

of spiritual and intellectual
still

life,

the

Church

dominant position, and culture
as

essentially oral.

In such circum-

stances a graphic technique for the multiplication of devotional images

was bound to appear

more of a

necessity than printing.

The woodcut

picture could depict legends or saints (until then only visible on church columns, portals, or windows) vividly enough to arrest the imagination. Because they were portable, people could take them home and con-

template them at leisure they could see the miracles of Christ or scenes from the Passion, feel that Biblical characters came to life in their hands, be reminded of the ever-present fact of death or see the fight between
;

angels and demons for the soul of a dying man. It is not surprising that the need for this kind of simple visual resource was felt long before the

need for printed literary, theological and scientific texts, interest in which was restricted to a small group of clerics and scholars. Even if the

reproduction of such texts had been as easy as that of block prints and this was not the case it would still have been natural and logical for the

block print to precede the printed book. But in fact the technique of the wood-cut did not in any sense inspire printing, which was the result of
a quite different technique. 63

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

47

At the beginning of the ijth century popular religious iconography developed, and it seems probable that the first workshops producing cuts were in or near monasteries, and that the great monastic orders
64 helped to promote the widespread use of pictures.

The

trade in block

prints developed quickly
(1423), St.

and pictures like the Virgin of Brussels Sebastian of Vienna (1437), St. Roch and St. Apollina were
and
also
St.

available everywhere, adorning the houses of ordinary citizens,

protecting them against misfortune.

Christopher, patron saint of travellers, protected one from sudden death, St. Sebastian from injury, St. Roch from the plague, St. Apollina from toothache. Possibly
;

indulgences were attached to the possession of other prints they were sold in their thousands on pilgrimages, at church doors and at fairs. The first wood-cuts were without a text but soon it was found effective
if

a short legend was added, either in a streamer cut out for the purpose, or between the white spaces separating the figures. At first the legends were inscribed by hand, but later they were engraved in the wood with

the picture. At the same time the pictures became more secular in character, and consisted for instance of fantastic alphabets in the shape of men

and animals, or legendary histories such as that of the Nine Champions of Christendom. The most spectacular development was in the making of playing cards, which was soon to become a large and prosperous industry. The cards were printed from blocks and then coloured, no
Parallel

longer drawn by hand and then illuminated as they had been before. developments could be detected in the trade in satirical posters,

in

commercial prospectuses and,

finally,

in

calendars,

where

text

65 naturally took precedence over picture.

Soon a simple sheet was not enough and small quarto wood-cut booklets appeared. A whole literature came into being, consisting of the most popular moral and religious stories of the day figures from the
:

Apocalypse, the Biblia pauperum, Lives of the Virgin, the Speculum salvationis, the Passion, Lives of the Saints, the Ars moriendi, etc. By
this stage the text

was of equal importance

to the illustrations, and

provided poor clergy in isolated places with models for their sermons and religious instruction. Above all, because of their price and format, these

were the

first books that were within the reach of the mass of people. Those who could not read could at least grasp the sense of a sequence of pictures, and those who had some rudimentary knowledge of reading and the popularity of block-books in which the text figured prominently tends to numbers of such readers - could the existence of

prove

large

follow the texts

much more

easily

because they were in the vernacular.

It is

with these works,

many of which
it

postdated printing, that the

story of the block-book ends after

a technique, however, is books are exactly the same as the wood-cuts used in the earliest printed books, and the first illustrated books are often adorned with pictures which have already had an independent life as prints. And indeed, for

had scarcely begun. Xylography as not abandoned. The pictures cut for the block-

several hundred years, right until the invention of photography, the trade in prints continued to flourish alongside that of the printed book.

No

relics

the block-books

have been scrutinised so closely or interrogated so keenly as which have come down to us, scarce vestiges of a

was once extensive. Their very scarcity is a proof of their popularity with a huge public which hardly bothered to preserve them. Most of those which survive have done so because they were inserted in the bindings of books or in the lining of chests. We have no wish to revive old arguments about which country can rightly claim priority in this art, or the correct dating of this or that print, or the origins and types of occupation of the cutters. We must ask a different question, one which bears directly on the origins of printing. If the first block-books
trade that

appeared before the invention of printing, can
filiation

we

then establish a

cutters,

between xylography and the printed book ? Could not the wood tired of repeatedly engraving new letters for every page, have

thought up the idea of cutting the individual letters they had to carve out of the old block ? Or of cutting individual letters which could be
placed side by side just as a text is composed for printing ? After which that would remain would be to go on to substitute metal for wood.
all

This seductive theory was in vogue among historians of printing in the last century. But no simple version of this theory will stand up to close scrutiny. For one thing many of the cuts, particularly those with a
written text, date from the second half of the
date from a period in
1 5th century. They therefore which printing had already been invented, and in which they were competing with it in the realm of popular literature. But the chief objection is the sheer difficulty of cutting letters in wood

with sufficient precision for the letter to register cleanly; to compose them properly would be very difficult since wood warps in dry or humid
conditions.

Wooden letters wear out quickly, and so it would have been
go to the trouble of repeatedly cutting huge

necessary to

them one

at a time.

Nor can

the theory be sustained

if

we

quantities of are supposed

to think of the craftsmen as simply substituting metal for

wood,

since

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

49

the wood engraver was quite ignorant of the techniques of casting and making fonts from type metal. Besides, the surviving documents prove clearly that the first printed books did not emerge from wood engravers'

workshops somehow re-adapted to a new process. Gutenberg, traditionally, and perhaps rightly, seen as the inventor of printing, was a goldsmith; so was Waldvogel of Prague, who was carrying out his own experiments at the same time so were many other printers of the first generation, especially at Basel, where they were members of the Guild
;

of Goldsmiths.

Thus the printed book cannot be thought of as a refinement introduced
engravers. There are further reasons to support this view. black Thick, printing ink only replaced the older ink used in block printing (which was made from lamp black and was brown and watery)

by

wood

appearance of the printed book. Similarly, it was not until after coming of printing that the press was used in xylography in place of the old method of rubbing used in the production of block-books, which allowed printing on one side of the sheet only. 66
after the

the

This is not to say that the printed book owed nothing to xylography. The very existence of texts and pictures printed with wood-blocks may have made the possibility of using paper for the mass-production of texts more evident, and quite probably the success of block prints and books made it possible to foresee the kind of success that a more perfect
process might enjoy. In short,
it is

possible that the widespread use of
initial

block-books spurred Gutenberg's Fust to help finance him. Perhaps

own

enthusiasm and persuaded
cast in earthen

letters

were originally

moulds, in which wooden types had left their impression; perhaps someone experimented at first with a metallographic process to produce block-books. But it is necessary to reiterate that such experiments could
only have been undertaken and carried to a successful conclusion by specialists in metal-working, and particularly in the art of metal founding. It
is

to the activity of these metal founders that

we must now

turn.

The 'Discovery' of Printing
Just what problems faced the

men who were experimenting

in the first

half of the ijth century, trying to find a method for reproducing books by mechanical means? First we must recall some of the essential aspects

JO

of the printing process and then,

briefly, describe the details

of the tech-

nique eventually adopted, which was to remain the basis for printing right up to the Industrial Revolution in the i9th century. The technique of printing by hand can be reduced to three essentials, moveable type cast in metal; a fatty based ink; and the press. 67 The problems of producing an ink thicker than that in common use, and of devising a printing press which would do away with the rubbing technique of the wood engravers, were relatively easy to solve, and we shall not dwell orl them here. They were in any case secondary to the really essential problem on which the whole secret of the art of printing, at least as developed in the West, depends - namely the making up of a page of print from separate, moveable types.
:

what the process involves. For each letter or sign a punch at the end of which the letter is engraved in relief. The punch is used to strike a die in a softer metal which holds the intaglio (impression). Held in a mould, the die can then cast as many 'sorts' as desired, the letters being made from a metal which fuses at a low temperature, tin for instance or lead. The letters appear in relief as on the original punch. The pioneers benefited from the experience of goldsmiths and engravers of medallions as well as the moneyers, who were often, anyway, recruited from the ranks of the goldsmiths. They knew already how to make the blind stamps which were used to ornament the leather covers of books. From the 1 3th century metal founders had known how to employ punches engraved in relief to produce the clay moulds from whose hollow matrices they made the relief inscriptions on crests. Pewter makers were using brass die-stamps from the i4th century, and for a long time die-stamps had been used to strike coins, medals and seals. Although coins and medals were normally made by inserting a thin strip of metal between dies struck by a hammer, they also knew how to obtain this effect by casting metal in a mould, and this latter method, favoured in antiquity, came back into favour at the end of the i4th
Let us
recall

must be made from hard metal

century in
So,

Italy.

65

from the beginning of the i5th century, the techniques of casting from moulds, whether metal, or a mixture of fine sand and clay, and that of die stamping were both known. It was also known how to combine the two techniques by first punching out a matrix and then casting metal
in
it,

in

order to obtain figures in relief- the principle involved in

letter

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

//

founding. All that was lacking was the idea of adapting the technique to printing, which would merely demand solving the problems of detail

involved in such an adaptation. Probably the inventors tried various devices, only gradually arriving at the final solution. Recent work tends
to suggest that the
first

experimenters, finding that a page

made up of so
difficult

many moveable

letters

was unstable, and

that

it

was incredibly

to hold the characters together firmly to form a level surface suitable for inking, probably tried to overcome the difficulties by casting whole
69 pages en bloc from a single mould.

If we keep these facts in mind (and we have given the details at the beginning to help the reader understand what follows) we may proceed to the documentary evidence which gives us a glimpse of the experiments

which led eventually to success. Unfortunately we possess very little evidence. Archival material is rare and such documentary evidence as
has survived
its
is difficult

to interpret.

So long

as the technique

was

still

in

infancy, the early pioneers (reasonably enough) did not possess an appropriate vocabulary in which to describe the instruments and

which they were beginning to work. Almost as sparse, more explicit, are the hints to be gleaned from contemporary chroniclers. As for the examination of the earliest printed books which have come down to us, although this may support some hypotheses, it can tell us nothing definite about production processes. Most such books, in any case, seem to have been printed when the invention had already been perfected, and was being applied on a commercial scale. Firstly the archives. Pride of place must go to a number of cryptic documents relating to the famous lawsuit which took place at Stras7 bourg in 1439. A citizen of Mainz, one Johann Gensfleisch, known also as Gutenberg, a goldsmith descended from a family of moneyers, had
materials with

though

slightly

settled in

1436 to 1439 ne

Strasbourg by 1434, and probably a few years earlier. From was partnership with three others, Hans Riff, Andreas

m

Dritzehn and Andreas Heilmann, to improve a number of secret processes which he had communicated to them in return for their investment
of

Andreas Dritzehn died and

money and which was intended for the fair at Aix-la-Chapelle. 71 his heirs demanded that they succeed him as

partners. This gave rise to a lawsuit and the documents relating to it have survived. learn that there were three secret processes which Guten-

We

berg was developing the polishing of precious stones, the manufacture of mirrors (if we can so interpret the word Spiegel) and a new art which
:

involved the use of a press, some 'pieces' (Stiicke) either separate or cast en bloc, some 'forms' (Formeri) made of lead, and finally 'things related

to the action of the press' (der^udem Trueken geboref). These texts, though susceptible of many and contradictory interpretations, appear to indicate

Gutenberg was then engaged on experiments in printing. But nothing in them helps to elucidate the real import of his researches, how far they were advanced or what process they employed, although it is conceivable that he was already printing with some skill. But we need not labour the point. He was not the only one making such experiments.
that

Documents discovered in Avignon reveal that another goldsmith, Procopius Waldvogel of Prague, entered into agreements with the citizens of Avignon 72 between 1444 and 1446, undertaking to teach some
the art of the silversmith (ars argenteria) and others the art of
'artificial

writing' (ars artificialiter scribendf). In a contract dated 1444 there is a reference to duo abecedaria calibis, et dua s formas ferreas, unum instrumentum
calibis

vocatum

vitis,

ad artem

scribendi pertinentes. In

quadraginta octo formas stangni, necnon diversas forma s 1446 there is a reference to nonnulla
callibe,

instrumenta sive artificia, causa artificialiter scribendi, tarn de ferro, de
de cupro, de lethono, deplumbo, de stangno et defuste. In the

same year Waldvo-

gel supplied or

and Latin
scribendi

texts to

promised to supply equipment for reproducing Hebrew Davin of Caderousse, a Jew viginti septem litteras
:

ebreaycare formatas,
. .
.

s(c)isas in ferro bene et debitejuxta scientiam et practicam
ingeniis defuste, de stagno et de ferro
artificialiter in
. . .

una cum

ingenia et instru-

menta ad scribendum
are not

Hitera latina.

What exactly was the process Waldvogel was perfecting?
couched
in

Since the texts

an appropriate technical vocabulary this question such poses problems of interpretation that it is impossible to give a final answer. It has been argued that he is referring to a kind of primitive
printing press or even a writing machine. But that seems improbable. The two alphabets of steel mentioned in the lawsuit of 1444, the 48 letters

engraved in iron and the 27 Hebrew letters in the 1446 lawsuit could well be punches but equally well matrices. The 'pieces of tin' (formas de
could be castings, but how do we interpret that word forma, already used in the Strasbourg documents ? Does it refer to individual letters or to a whole page of letters cast at one time? In that case was it
stangno)

not some kind of block printing? Do the formas ferreas in the 1444 lawsuit refer to a block matrix made by using the punches successively?

These are the questions raised by Maurice Audin. 73
the archives let us pass on to the narrative sources. First the in the Cologne Chronicle of 1499, particularly interesting because the writer says he received his information from Ulrich

From

famous mention

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

]}

Zell, the first printer in Cologne, who was in contact with Schoeffer, one of Gutenberg's partners. This is the translation: 'The noble art of printing was first invented at Mainz in Germany. It came to us in the

Year of Our Lord 1440 and from then until 1450 the art and all that is it was being continually improved Although the art was discovered in Mainz, as we have said, the first trials (yurbyldttng) were carried out in Holland in a Donatus printed there (gedruckt syn) before
connected with
. . .

The commencement of the art dates from these books; now much more authoritative and delicate than it was in its actually first manner. With the passage of time it has been perfected still more
that time.
it is

(mehr kunstlicher warden).' This is the source of the great controversy about the 'first manner' employed in Holland, the subject of so much hypothesis. 75 Since

Holland was

a great centre

of xylography,
;

it

could be assumed that what

that technique was also well Germany, the Rhineland and France. Other sources, though later, testify to the persistence of the story and appear to confirm the theory that impressions were obtained in Holland by some process or other, which attempts have often been made to reconstruct. In 1561 two Humanists, Jan Van Zuren and Dirk Volkertroon Coornhert of Haarare being referred to are

wood-cuts but then

known

in

lem, claimed for that city the glory of having been the cradle of printing

and Adrian de Jonghe records
his death, a local tradition

in his Chronicles of Holland, printed after

according to which an inhabitant of the place, one Laurens Janszoon, surnamed Coster, before 1441 invented the art of assembling moveable type cast in metal with a view to reproducing

texts by mechanical means. Besides other books, Coster allegedly printed a Speculum humanae salvationis and a Donatus. His secret was

divulged in Amsterdam in 1442, then workman who had left him. 76

at

Cologne and

at

Mainz by

a

references have been found which mention the purchase at of Bruges copies of a Doctrinale 'cast from mould' and they have sometimes been associated with these accounts. They may be found in the

Some

Memoriaux of Jean le Robert, abbot of St. Aubert de Cambrai, under the dates 1 44 5 and 1451. But here again there is a problem of interpretation
:

is

the phrase used,jeteen moule,

as

opposed

to 'cut')? If so,

synonymous with faille en moule ('cast' then ordinary wood-cuts are being referred to.

(Playing card makers were qualified as tailleurs de monies.} Or does the phrase Jete en moule allude to a technique of metal casting by which the

page was cast in a single block from a matrix prepared beforehand? There have been some attempts to interpret it in this way.

J4 In the face of such vagueness and difficulties of interpretation we are reduced to what are sometimes very tenuous hypotheses about early

attempts at printing in Holland. We get no nearer to a solution by looking at the books since no evidence of actual techniques used can be found

by examining them. One fact, however, deserves to be noted: there exists a whole series of undated printed books, very probably of Dutch
origin,

among which

are

two

leaves of an

ABC and

four of a Donatus,

preserved in the library at

Haarlem.

Some

experts believe these to have

been cast from earthen moulds and not metal matrices, and perhaps made with wooden punches. These texts are probably later than the first books
printed at Mainz, but it is still possible that the method used derived from an earlier one than that employed at Mainz. 77

Others, better qualified than us, are still trying to throw light on these problems. We may confine ourselves here to saying that it will probably never be possible to establish with any confidence how the early pioneers

achieved their results.

of the

letters.

The crucial question relates to the actual making What kind of punches did they use in their first trials?

Were the matrices always of metal or did they use clay and fine sand to make their moulds at the beginning ? If so, did they use wooden punches ? Did they not make moulds of lead by melting lead around a metal or wooden punch, and would they not end up with letters of lead or some metal if the medium used was a lead mould? Did they turn out the
matrices and printing-blocks for whole pages at a time? One thing is sure about the early craftsmen that they were feeling their way forward
:

by slow degrees for a long time before they found the answer. And another fact seems certain that the men at work on this were numerous - Coster (if he did exist) in Holland, Gutenberg, Fust and Schoeffer in Mainz, Waldvogel at Avignon, all were trying to perfect the process, to reproduce texts by mechanical means. Lack of documentary evidence is
:

that prevents us from adding the names of other pioneers have been struggling with the same problems in the years between 1430 and 1450 when the success of the xylographs had demonstrated the utility and prospects of such an invention.

probably

all

who must

Be that as it may, if they had not already done so between 1445 and 1450 the various experimenters were on the point of achieving a breakthrough,
and the
fifteen years after that

printing,

when

marked a decisive step in the history of the invention once perfected began to be applied

commercially and industrially, and spread throughout Europe.

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

//

and

Mainz was without any doubt the cradle of the first printing industry its evolution is linked with three names Gutenberg, the man named in the Strasbourg legal suit, Johann Fust, a rich citizen who was his financier, and Peter Schoeffer, a former student of the University of Paris who was probably a copyist and a calligrapher before turning
:

remaining in Strasbourg until at least 1444, Gutenberg returned to his native city before October, 1448. But to continue his experiments he had to have more capital and he found a backer in the person of Fust

printer. After

who loaned him

800 florins

at

5

per cent interest in 1450,

to pay for certain implements (Gec^uge). Later he promised to let Gutenberg have another 300 florins for his 'book work' ( Werk der Biicher) under

another agreement by which the expenses incurred in buying paper,

parchment and ink were guaranteed. All this suggests that Gutenberg was on the brink of success in his work, if he had not already succeeded. But in 145 5 there was a dramatic turn of events. Fust accused Gutenberg
of not keeping to his agreement, and took him to court, where he was ordered to pay the interest due and return the capital not yet spent. 78 Two
years later, on the i4th October 1457, the first work which can be dated came from the press, the Mainz Psalter, the work of Fust and his new
associate, Schoeffer. Subsequently, SchoefFer

and
1

his firm,

which continued

in existence until the

developed the business, beginning of the

6th century, remained for a long time one of the most important print-

ing houses in Europe. Many mysteries remain.
that
it

was no

first

The perfect execution of the Psalter proves attempt. Some early copies of Donatus, and some

calendars, suggest that printing had already been on as a trade since 1450 at the latest-, and it is possible that Gutengoing had some berg produced printing before his return to Mainz, particularly

German astronomical

during his partnership with Fust.

Was

it

when Gutenberg's experiments
an embarrassment and

had

finally

come

to something that Fust took the opportunity of ridding

himself of an inventor

who had become

whom

he could replace with one of his assistants, Peter Schoeffer, who knew his master's secrets but was perhaps more amenable and possessed more

acumen? If so, Gutenberg appears to be the typical genius, stripped of the secret to which he had devoted years of his life. Did he continue to work after his rupture with Fust? What happened to him?
business

Bamberg as some suppose, without convincing proof? We know very little about him after 1 45 It is thought
Did he go on with
he
his

experiments

at

5

.

may have lived in penury because from 1457 until his death he was unable to pay the chapter of St. Thomas at Strasbourg the sum of 4

livres

he owed

as interest

Elector of Mainz ennobled
to his palace at Eltville
a printing press.

on a loan made in 1442. In 1465 the Archbishop him for personal services and attached him where one cannot help wondering if he installed

At all events, despite the many contemporary references to his role in the invention of printing, the name of Gutenberg does not

79 appear on the imprint of any book.

generally agreed that several workshops were simultaneously in operation between 1450 and 145 5 in Mainz producing a great number of books on a commercial scale Donatus' Latin grammar for beginners,
It is
:

calendars in the vernacular, 'letters of indulgence' (receipts given to in those who bought the indulgences granted by Pope Nicholas

V

145

1

in

order to

assist the

Turks).

Then

there

King of Cyprus, Guy de Lusignan, against the were more important works, like the celebrated

42-line Bible in three volumes, traditionally regarded as the first printed book, the 36-line in three volumes, printed before 1461, the Mainz
Psalter, the

Constance Missal, the Catholicon of Giovanni Balbi (1460) and many others. All these came from Mainz presses and have been the subject of intense study and grouped into categories according to the
80 design of their letters;

some scholars have even tried to assign them to Without workshops. following them into this specialised territory, we can at least be certain that during the first period of the commercial application of the press, printers were becoming more confident of their powers as their methods improved and their production techniques became more efficient. In the first years they restricted themselves to printing posters and pamphlets. Then they became bolder and published great works. When Pfister of Bamberg first combined letterpress with illustrations engraved on wood the book assumed its final and definitive form. At the same time, pupils of the first printers began to spread across Europe, teaching wherever they went the most effective method for the
actual
diffusion of ideas

known

until the present day.

3

The Making of the Type
Despite the crudity of their methods, the
in

first

printers often succeeded

producing masterpieces. The 42-line Bible ascribed to Gutenberg has

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

//

compelled the admiration of experts. But we can only imagine the problems and anxieties he had, and guess at how much time it took him.

There were, after all, many technical improvements that had yet to be introduced and which were needed to increase the productivity of the

new
the

industry. Experts and historians have hardly begun to reconstruct many trials and errors which must have been necessary to overcome

the problems faced by the first printers. To begin with, there was the problem of making type sorts. Not only did the printer need a foolproof method of making them with the aid of

punches and moulds, but he had to find metals and alloys tough enough not to damage the punch when struck, and a matrix that would not melt

when

was in the fluid state and on the point of fusion. It was the alloy-produced characters should accept ink and not quickly wear out with use. It seems that the first punches were of brass or bronze, metals less durable than the steel later used, and that they
the alloy
vital, too, that

initially

punches.
copper.
for

used matrix moulds which were made by pouring lead round the The next stage was to use lead matrices and finally to switch to

Some have

credited Schoeffer with the use of steel and copper
steel

making punches and matrices. But others think that date only from the last quarter of the 1 th century, and
5

punches

lead matrices

decades of the i6th century. 81 In such conditions, where several metals with different properties were involved, it is easier to explain the diversity of types used in the ijth century:
are
still

to be found in the

first

for they were

made from punches and

matrices which often

wore out

very quickly.

An

even greater drawback was the use of so many typo-

graphic signs imitated from the handwriting employed in writing manuscripts. The first printers cast letters joined by ligatures and used

more typographic

standard abbreviations (a for an or am q for quid) so that there were many signs than there are today. It makes us wonder
;

whether the gradual abandonment of the ligatures and abbreviations so common in the 1 5th and i6th centuries was not partly due to a wish to

number of punches and matrices needed, one aspect of the toward tendency uniformity and simplification so characteristic of the evolution of the book. The letters themselves present similar problems. Did the inventors
reduce the
hit upon an alloy tough enough not to wear out quickly? The problem can best be appreciated if it is realised that the actual letters were cast from a composition of three different metals, lead, tin and antimony, combined in strict proportions to secure maximum strength. If made only of lead they oxidised, while letters made of lead plus tin alone

immediately

were not hard enough. Letters cast in the ijth century were certainly strong, and so were those of the next 300 years, though probably less so than those of today. Ambroise Firmin-Didot has studied the Greek
used by Aldus and concluded they must have deteriorated rapidly. 70 Paulus Manutius came up against this difficulty and found that he needed new characters cast for each new book he printed. Otherwise, he
letters

In

1 5

claimed, they would be worn out after four months when he was still 82 only in the middle of the work. Largely on the basis of evidence found
in colophons,
staneis typis, it

where the impression

is

often said to have been carried out

has been argued that the first letters were made of an alloy with a tin base. Did they hesitate to add too much lead to avoid having to

and so damaging the matrices? Antimony must have come in later because antimony mines were not in operation until the :6th century. The only objection to this theory, which must at least modify it, is that the oldest types surviving, which were made in Lyons at the end of 1 5 th or early in the 1 6th century, and have been studied by M. Audin, prove under spectrographic analysis to contain tin, lead and antimony, with sometimes a speck of silver or iron. 8 * If an alloy of this sort wore more quickly
cast leaden letters in lead matrices (a feasible but tricky operation)
it

could only be because of variations in the proportions of the various metals in the compound, which is difficult to mix accurately in any case.

over

In fact the proportion seems to vary with each individual letter. Moreit is quite possible that other printers, who were not so skilled or
did not have access to the necessary metals, used alloys of inferior quality. Indeed, nearly 300 years later in 1764, Fournier, the type founder,

who

suggested
a

how

difficult

and

delicate a task

it

was to achieve the

right

combination 6f elements.
iron,

He said that for a long time printers had used
;

mixture of lead, crude copper called potin, antimony, and sometimes which yielded a metal too thick and viscous only in the last thirty

years had they simplified the process and improved the quality of the metal by using lead and an alloy of antimony. 84 Which goes to show that

even
alloy.

in the i8th

century they had not attained an entirely satisfactory

So type tended to wear quickly. Printers were forced to replace

letters
85

frequently and in this area were beset for a long time by many difficulties. To understand just what these were it must be remembered that punch
cutting, striking

and casting moulds were all long and delicate operations which only specialised craftsmen could perform. A punch cutter, for instance, needed to be a very experienced man with years of practice

The Technical Problems and
\

their Solution

jy

behind him. At the beginning of printing, an industry created out of

own

nothing, the earliest printers had to cut their own punches, make their matrices, and cast their own type each of which tasks would have
:

taken up a great deal of time and money, and probably had to be carried out with the help of only the most rudimentary equipment. If they met with any success it was only because so many of them had formerly been
goldsmiths.

Soon

specialists

began to emerge

in the

new

crafts associated

with

printing. They travelled from workshop to workshop, hiring their services out to masters who wanted to top up their stocks of letters or to

refurbish them. But punches and matrices remained the property of each workshop and this explains the rich diversity of type founts found in incunabula. The designing and cutting of type took up a great deal of
time, so that printers would use the new letters as they were cast and mix them with older characters which were only gradually replaced. Further-

more the production of new type cost a lot of money and when the chance came printers would buy material which came on to the market after a death or a bankruptcy. This happened only rarely. But they could ask a richer fellow tradesman to sell them some founts, or better still to let them have matrices from which they could turn out their own type. From the last quarter of the i5th century printers seem to have been
ready to engage in this kind of deal, though at first perhaps only reluctantly, altering some of the capitals each time, which they had re-engraved so as to differentiate between the work of each establishment.
It is in this

way

that there

began to be

a

measure of specialisation. The
;

of a small number of engravers, one or two of whom were celebrated, like Garamond and Granjon. At the same time the number of punches increased. The abandonment of gothic type and the adoption of roman

type founding business expanded in the early 1 6th century. In Germany it passed into the hands of the great printers in France it was the speciality

favoured rationalisation. Since
gradually, during the
1

it

made much

old stock unusable,

6th century, the manufacture and sale of individual

alphabets was concentrated in a small number of enterprises whose proprietors diligently collected the best punches they could find. By the iyth and i8th centuries a few dozen wealthy establishments had the

monopoly of type founding in Europe, but the market was now rationally
organised since printers could obtain the type they needed without 86 Founts cost a having to cast it themselves. great deal and that is one

continued for a long time to buy founts that lacked a sufficient number of letters. At the close of the 1 6th century, they usually
reason

why printers

6o

bought from 60,000 to 100,000
at a time.

sorts,

only enough to set up a few dozen

They pages and over again, which caused them to wear out all the more quickly. Moreover they would have to print off each 'forme' as soon as it was

therefore were forced to use the same letters over

composed in order to recover the type for immediate use. Thus the conscientious author could only correct his text in the course of printing, and this meant that there were often innumerable variants in a single
edition.

If the

market in type took a long time to become organised, any kind of uniformity or standardisation of type dimensions took even longer. Lack of a consistent standard of measurement proved a constant source
of trouble to the early printers. The 'height to paper' (i.e. the total height of each sort), which is today fixed by official regulations, was variable;

each region, indeed each shop, had its own convention. Sometimes founts cast in the same foundry were not even all cast to the same dimensions;
at least that

seems

a fair conclusion

when we find that a
in

series

of 222 type

Lyons contains 14 variations of height. When the characters in each fount had their own peculiar height it was impossible to use two founts together without having to file all the letters of one of the founts to make them the same height as the others a delicate chore, and one which must have held up book production. But once type casting became the prerogative of the
sorts surviving
:

from the i5th and i6th centuries

great type founders the
his clients

move towards uniformity began, even though each founder produced type of a particular height since this prevented
from taking

when Louis
Fournier 87
characters of

XV

tells

their custom elsewhere. In the i8th century, ruled that type heights were to be set at io l/ 2 'lines', us that the printers and founders at Lyons were using
1
-

up to 1 1 /2 There was an identical lack of uniformity when it came to the shape of the letters themselves. There was no standard of measurement, only a
and picturesque nomenclature. Gros Oeil, Paragon, Cicero, Gros Remain, Augustin were all purely arbitrary names without general agreement as to their meaning. Thus, there was much room for confusion. It was not until the i8th century that the efforts of Fournier and Didot forced the adoption of a definite standard of measurement,
traditional

the points system, the 'point' being i44th the size of the king's foot. This is the unit of measurement used in typography to this day. 88

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

61

4

Composition and Impression

Now let us look at the work of the printer himself, after having discussed
work of the punch cutter and of the type founder. His craft may be divided into two parts, composition and printing. Composition is the process by which type is assembled into pages and groups of pages in
the
the 'forme',

which

is

then placed in the press

itself

ready for the next

stage, the actual printing process.

The technique of hand composition, used less and less today since the invention of machines like the linotype and monotype, has hardly changed since the beginning of printing. The equipment used is much
the same
:

the compositor stands in front of a 'case', a large

wooden

cabinet subdivided into a series of pigeon holes each containing a different letter or sign. He takes out the letters one at a time and places them
in his

composing

'stick', a

now

metal.

When

a line of type has

small slotted receptacle, formerly wooden, been assembled in the stick (i.e.

'composed') the compositor places it in a 'galley', a small tray in which the lines of type are held, with a 'lead' between each line (the leads are
small lead pieces which do not register and which keep the lines apart). He then groups the lines into pages and assembles the pages in the forme

where they are secured with wooden wedges and firmly tied together. The compositor has to master a series of movements, carrying them out adroitly and with such speed and accuracy that each of his movements becomes automatic. This type of manual rhythm had not previously
been required in the manufacturing processes of the ijth century. It prompts the question, how far did the need to increase output impel printers between the i5th and i8th centuries to find methods which

would enable these operations to be carried out as efficiently as possible ? 89

Two observations should quickly be made. Firstly, the earliest compositheir modern counterparts. done today the compositor stands before a sloping case with his freedom to move unimpeded. In the i5th century (and even in the i6th) this was not so, as a picture in the Printers' Dance of Death (Matthew Husz, Lyons, 1499) shows: the compositor sits at a very low case, which is only slightly tilted and is mounted on a trestle. In

tors

were undoubtedly less comfortable than
is

When hand composing

62

the early i6th century a series of prints - generally, printers' marks show a case which is placed a little higher, tilted rather more to allow
facilitate
is

access to letters in the upper half of the case, and placed on a desk to handling: but the compositor still works sitting down. It

only in the second half of the century that the case assumed position and the compositor stood, as he does today.
Secondly, the

its

present

often entailed work of great a for delicacy. Today, example, compositor can tell by touch which way it from the a letter is as he takes up pigeon hole by feeling for the notch

work of early compositors

having to glance at

it in the composing stick without Old types which have survived and traces left by type which had become embedded in the pages of certain early printed

cut in

its

shank, and so can insert
it.

at the moment of impression prove that 15th-century types were not normally notched so the compositor must have had to use his eyes to check the letters before placing them in the stick.

books

But the

critical

problem

in the technique of

composing
:

is

that of the

distribution of the sorts inside the case.

To work really fast a compositor

has to handle the letters without pausing or looking he has to become an automaton, just like a modern typist at the keyboard. To acquire
at cases in which the letters are always same order. Cases have to be arranged uniformly in all the establishments where he might be called on to work otherwise he would have to restrain his reflexes every time he changed his place of work (something that happened much more frequently in the

dexterity the printer has to

work

'dissed' (distributed) in the

:

i5th-iyth centuries than today).

Nowadays
is

in

any one country the same

case,

with no more than minor

variations, always used. In the upper compartment ('upper case') two sub-compartments contain large and small capital letters. In the lower

compartment nearer to the compositor

are the lower case letters. Cases

used in different countries will vary according to the language of the
country, just as the letters on typewriters do. How were the sorts distributed ? Were the letters arranged in a different way in each country as happens today ? Or did Latin favour uniformity,

and, if so, when did the differentiation between the cases of different countries begin? Unfortunately such questions are almost impossible to answer, since no documents containing precise information on this

subject survive from before the end of the zyth century. If we recall that, owing to the habit of engraving letters ligatured together and founded in the same type, and owing to the many abbreviations used in the i jth

and early i6th

centuries, the

number of typographic

signs

was

itself

The Technical Problems and
variable, then
it

their Solution

6)

is

clear that the case could not

have been uniform.

All the evidence suggests that type was dissed in a different way in each area according to local practice, for at a time when local traditions were
the origin of a wood-cut of the ijth or i6th or a 15th-century character by its shape; even the presses varied from district to district. On the other hand the travels of journeymen printers, which were so frequent in the period, must have

strong

it

is

easy to

tell

centuries by

its style,

this in

served to transplant trade practices far from their place of origin, and turn must have led to a general acceptance of the practices which
felt

Hence principles which seem to us to be self-evident, letters, must sooner or later have been adopted. Yet no strict rules seem to have come into being for several centuries although such rules would have served to make the compositor's work easier and to help him acquire those automatic reflexes whose necessity we have stressed. In a work entitled Science pratique de fimprimerie, 90 Fertel, a printer from Amiens, tells us that the dissing of type still varied in France from
were
to be best.
like the separation

of upper and lower case

;

appears that master printers usually in the upper case, so that when journeymen changed their place of work they had to 'relearn the layout' each time. Fertel advised two dispositions of type which he judged most

workshop to workshop as made changes as they saw

late as 1723. It
fit,

convenient and wished to see in general use. One involved the placing of the large and small capitals in alphabetic order, as they are today. The letters J and U, which were not in general use in the earliest days,

were displaced, and this seems to point to a very old tradition. In the bottom left hand side of the upper case and in the lower case, the lower case letters were stored, as they are today, in pigeon holes of varying size depending on how frequently the letters they contained were used. This layout, with a few notable exceptions, is like the one given in Momoro's Traite elementaire de I'imprimerie (1793) and in the Encyclopedia91 (where, however, the plan of a case and the elevated drawing which accompanies it do not agree in their representation of the lower case). It seems therefore that even by the end of the i8th century in France the location of the
letters in the case
It

was only

at the

did not yet accord with any absolutely agreed pattern. beginning of the i9th century that a layout like

Momoro's or

that

shown

in the Encyclopedie
settled)

became general (without
it

even then being absolutely of normal trade practice. 92

and since then

has remained part

The essential equipment for making the impression of type on paper was

64

of course the press. Solid and

rustic, this hardly changed from the midi6th to the late i8th century. The principle was simple. 93 The forme -a set of several pages of type held together so that the characters could not

get out of position

- was placed on the bed or press

stone, originally

made of smooth and polished marble but replaced in the 1 8th century by a steel plate. Thus positioned, the forme was then inked with two ink
the press was brought into play. screw, connected at one end to a

dabbers, the sheet of paper was placed over the standing type, and then A sharp pull on the press bar activated a

flat platen poised above the marble slab. hard the forme by the action of the platen, paper, pressed against took the imprint of the type.

The

Thus summarised, the whole principle seems easy. But in practice three
problems had to be solved before the instrument could be applied industrially. Firstly, it was almost impossible to ink the forme when it
crucial
lay

between the bed and the platen, since

it

was impossible to

raise the

platen high enough to make this operation feasible. Hence, somehow, the forme had to be moved when it was to be inked. To achieve this, the
first

printers placed
rails

mounted on
(the 'guide')

it and the stone beneath it on a small carriage which moved back and forward by means of a crank

and

a simple

system of

pullies.

The second problem or series of problems involved the actual printing.
It

was important

that the paper

-

particularly the margins

- was not

splashed with ink at the moment of printing. There was a risk that the ink would spread beyond the inked areas on the forme. So a protecting sheet of paper or parchment was used which exposed only those parts

of the forme which held the type. Further, whatever the quality of the characters or the care spent on their precise justification (i.e. the alignment of each line of type) the letters would not all stand at exactly the

same height. If the sheet were placed directly in contact with the platen, letters which were slightly below the others would be badly printed, and others would leave either too much or too little impression on the paper. To overcome this and to introduce a bit of give into the surface of the platen, either a sheet of felt or several sheets of paper needed to be inserted between the sheet to be printed and the platen.
These different problems led the printers to use the system of the frisket and tympan. The 'tympan' is a double frame (large and small tympan) secured to the press by hinges. The bed and the forme are placed within
it.

Each of the two frames has
is

a sheet

of parchment stretched across

it,

and the smaller one
pressure.

covered with a sheet of thick flannel to ease the

The 'frisket' is another frame hinged to the large tympan on the

The Technical Problems and their Solution
side opposite the

6j

one which attaches

it

to the press.

It

consists of a taut

sheet of parchment or strong paper cut away in those places where the sheet meets the type, which prevents the sheet being marked during the
is being printed the frisket folds back on the the paper, which, in addition, cannot be displaced tympan, trapping because it is attached to the tympan by two spikes.

printing.

When

a sheet

the most difficult, and concerned the size of the which was necessarily restricted. To achieve a proper result the press bar must be pulled in such a way as to apply pressure evenly over
platen,

The final problem was

the type. Consequently the surface of the platen has to be exactly parallel with the top surface of the type. As a result for a long time it was impossible to print as large

an area as a whole sheet at once half a sheet was was moved, and the second half printed. Two pulls, therefore, were required to print one sheet.
:

printed, the carriage

This was the method used in most European countries from the mid8th century. The press was a relatively efficient instrument, yet simple enough in its construction to be made without difficulty by a joiner or simple carpenter, and so in France, at least, there were no

i6th to the

1

makers until the i8th century. the earliest experimenters in printing begin by using the rubbing technique, used to print the block-books, before they realised how a
specialised printing-press

Did

press could create typographical impressions ? Possibly but they must very soon have used the press in the accepted way since it is inconceiv;

able that the 42-line Bible could have been printed by any other method. was a suitable But how then did the first presses come into being?

How

Did they first try out methods different from that press ? Did some printers - in particular itinerant printers - turn finally adopted out impressions without using a press, or using only some very light and simple form of press ? On the basis of what we know of it, the technique of presswork in the
first

built?

earliest
it

days appears in

many

respects to have been rather peculiar

and

quite different from what we would naturally suppose, especially as regards the method used to assemble the letters in the forme. If one examines the oldest types that have survived, or the traces left

may have been

th-century types which got embedded in the pages of certain copies, the results are disturbing most of them are pierced with a tiny hole or

by

1

5

;

chink and the base

often either bevel-edged or arrow-shaped. There are hypotheses which attempt to explain this. It has been
is

argued that the holes drilled through many types were made to hold a thin cord or metal shank which kept the type in line and ensured that the

page would be level at a time when the device for tightening up the forme was not yet perfected. That seems unlikely. But when it is realised that
the holes were
cast,

we

letter. It
first

made by a sharp instrument and a file after the letter was can appreciate how much time this must have taken for each gives us an idea of the almost insurmountable difficulties that the
had to resolve to exercise their
craft at a

printers

time

when

the

95 technique of typography was still primitive. a or arrow of bevel The custom shape cutting

at

the base of the

characters

is

still

more mysterious.
it

It is

intended to
types.

make

easier to achieve the

certainly possible that it was same height to paper for all

But
fall

a rectangular base

For the bevelled shape would enable easier and more exact work. would surely have been better than a bevel or an

arrowhead. Types placed out of true by the latter methods will tend to over even when held together, especially when the technique of
securing absolute register by the rigid tightening of the forme was unknown. In conditions like these, hampered by unstable type, defective

founts, and a precarious method of clamping the forme, how is it that books of the i5th century were so meticulously printed? The technical experts who have asked this question have proposed an extremely bold hypothesis to answer it. They think the impression was taken in the reverse way from that which we regard as normal, the reversed forme

being placed on top of the sheet of paper. For
press different

this we need to imagine a - and - from the one eventually used. probably simpler From here we need only make a short step to consider that a press was not indispensable, especially for the production of small books, and to

wonder whether the
technical research

itinerant printers, so

numerous
It is

in the

1

5th century,

can always have carried a press with them.
questions.
first

to be

hoped

that the

now in progress will one day enable us to resolve these

96

Whatever the truth, the first presses must have been primitive. The books were printed a page at a time, even in quarto, and the formes were always page size. 97 Despite all the care bestowed on them, the lines of print on the pages which were printed in succession on one side of the sheet could not be at exactly the same height from one page to another and the appearance of the books often suffers as a result. After 1470 this
inconvenience tends to disappear. It seems that the technique of the double pull on the press bar started at this time. The forme is from
then on composed of several pages and could

now sometimes

be of the

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

67

same size as the sheet. But for this to be possible the forme, now mounted on a mobile carriage, had to be capable of rapid and precise movement. Very quickly, before the end of the 1 5th century, a system of cranks and
pullies

was used to bring about this horizontal movement. For a long time printers were content to slide the carriage over the level surface of a

wooden

table; eventually

it

was mounted on two

rails

to

make

the

operation easier

and more accurate.

These were not the only improvements made between the 1 5th and i8th centuries. 98 Printers did not seek to modify the basic principle of the press but simply improved on detail. In the i6th century they replaced
the

wooden screw

thread with a metal one and reinforced the parts

subjected to pressure in order to make the press sturdier. These improvements are visible in wood-cuts of the period and in printers' marks which
depict presses.

We

can distinguish three types of press: one made

at

Lyons, one in North Germany and the third Flemish. The German press, slender and rather fragile in appearance, at first gave way quite rapidly in

many workshops
in Paris, then
in the

Low

press was quickly adopted Switzerland and England, and finally throughout France, Countries and Spain. It appears to have been in general use

to the Flemish.

The Lyons

by the end of the i6th century. However, when the printing industry developed in Holland in the
early iyth century, a great

map printer, Willem Janszoon Blaeu, who had worked with Tycho Brahe the astronomer and had made mathematical instruments before he came into publishing, introduced many

features of

modifications to the press. To make it stronger he reinforced some its construction and put in a spring called the 'yoke' to make the platen give a more even impression. The 'Dutch' press gradually

spread in the

Low

Countries, which quickly earned a reputation for

high quality work, and then in England, but was never adopted in France, which continued to use the old classic Lyons press. Thus between the 1 6th and i8th centuries the traditional double action press was only
modified in minor ways. For nearly 300 years printers were quite happy with this solid instrument on which they printed at a speed that astonishes

Each day, i6th and lyth-century workmen, who laboured 12 to 16 hours, turned out 2500-3500 sheets (printed on one side only, it is true). This means they printed one sheet every 20 seconds, a staggering rate of
us.

work. 99
It

was not

until the

end of the

1

8th century at the time of the Encyclo-

68

paedia that the increase in the output of the press and the interest in technical questions led master printers to search for a way of increasing the speed of the press and of making the labour required of workmen less
exhausting. Between 1782 and 1785,

two

great printers, Didot and

Anisson, separately perfected a press which required only one pull, by a modification to the screw thread - but their invention was not generally
taken up.
It

was only the increase

in the size

of editions (already responearlier)

sible for the revolution in

papermaking we discussed

to the adoption of a completely

new machine,

quite different

which led from the

hand

1795 Lord Stanhope in London, helped by a a press made almost entirely of metal, still devised mechanic, Walker, used today by many printers to take proofs. After this the mechanical
press.

Around

revolution of the i9th century had its effect. On the 29th November, 1814, John Walker, director of The Times, one of the first of the large
circulation newspapers,

showed printers who were preparing to start the presses forthcoming issue of his newspaper, printed on a mechanised overnight press adapted for commercial use. It was with some pride that he wrote in that issue of the newspaper, 'Our paper

work on hand

today presents to the public the practical results of the greatest advance in printing since its invention.' He added, 'In one hour no less than 1 100 sheets can be printed'. 100

5

Imposition

101

far discussed were not the only ones printers had to decent print run they had to use paper of good quality, which was not always easy to obtain. Once obtained, the paper had to be
face.

The problems so

To ensure a

prepared. Moreover several pages had to be printed on one sheet, and
this

was, as we shall see, a complicated process. To take an impression and accept ink the paper had to be very resistant
sized, factors that

and carefully

the early days. That is why good care over the grades of paper intended for printing. Italian paper-

could not always be taken for granted in papermakers from the ijth century took

makers, in particular, at that time made a paper from fine rags which was of great strength and delicacy and sufficient thickness. It was of a greyish
white colour and uniform in quality.
entirely satisfactory.
It

seems, indeed, to have been

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

69

to

is a great devourer of paper and the mills were hard put to produce enough. In the i5th and early i6th century printers would often have to use several types of paper of different origin to

But the press
it

print a single volume and, in the i6th century, as the number of presses multiplied, the paper industry in some places could not provide printers with sufficient quantities of suitable paper. The lack of sufficient
;

rags and the desire to work faster to make a higher profit encouraged papermakers to produce paper of mediocre quality. For a long time the correspondence of printers throughout Europe is
quantities of

good

with recriminations and complaints against those supplying them with poor quality paper described as 'greasy', 'brittle', 'fragile', 'badly sized'. This was reflected in the quality of the book, especially because
filled
it necessary for printers to buy paper of their press so as to reduce transport costs. Consequently, printers often had to be satisfied with low-grade paper from their own district, and only began to be able to afford to transport paper from else-

the need to

make economies made

in the vicinity

where in the i8th century. But the most intractable problems were those which concerned the
disposition of the pages within the forme. To make this clear we should just recall the basic principles determining the format of a book. The

made by folding the sheets of paper once, and so four pages on each sheet, two on each side. In a quarto book the sheets are folded twice and consist of eight pages, four on each side in an octavo book the sheets are folded three times and contain 16 pages, eight on each side, and so on. When folded the sheets should comprise a quire which would be made up of four pages in a folio, eight in a quarto, sixteen in an octavo. But often the need to give greater strength to the quires (sections) of folios and quartos make it necessary to insert two sheets at once, so doubling the bulk (and at the same time the number of pages) of each quire. On the other hand in the smaller formats (i6mo, 24mo, 321110) quires made from a single sheet would be too thick and so printers make several quires from the pages printed on a single sheet: for i6mos they cut the sheet in two and make two quires of 8 leaves, that is 1 6 pages. For 24mos they cut off a third of the sheet and make two
folio

book

is

are printed

;

quires, one of 8 leaves (16 pages), the other of 4 leaves (8 pages), in French as the^ro-r cahier and thefeuitteton.

known

To

be able to fold the sheet in this

way

printers

had to be careful to

give each page its proper place in the forme. For a folio, pages i and 4 had to be set on one side, side by side, and pages 2 and 3 on the other,

and likewise for other formats.

It

seems

a

complicated method, but

it

ensured that each quire was of a convenient thickness and the bound volume of maximum strength. It also greatly facilitated the work of the
binder because he could fold the sheets which
anically without
risk

made up

a

volume mech-

before this

of error in the pagination, which was frequent of system imposition (i.e. arrangement of pages in the forme)

was adopted.
Recent research 102 has shown that manuscript scribes already knew and practised such a system of imposition, particularly for manuscripts
of small or
abstracts,

medium format intended

for teaching, like manuals and

and for books of

practical religion (breviaries,

Books of

Hours, works relating to diocesan administration) which were commonly produced in large numbers. Printers, however, were slow to adopt the
technique because of the custom of printing books page by page on a small forme (smaller than the sheet of paper) which at first encouraged

them to cut the sheet before printing, although this made the whole operation longer. Moreover paper varied, coming generally in two sizes regalis (about 70 cm x 50 cm) and median (about 50 cm x 30 cm) and
printers often used half sheets of regalis along with whole sheets of median so that in the same work some sheets would be printed as if for a folio volume, others as if for a quarto volume. Finally, the quires generally

included as

many

sheets as

were judged capable of taking

a solid

binding

and the number of pages

in each quire

would vary

in the

same volume.

Quires in quarto-size incunabula, for instance, rarely consist of a single sheet folded twice, but of two or three sheets folded together. At the

end of the i5th century, the custom of making the quire of a quarto from two sheets, or 8 leaves, was established. The disadvantages of such

methods
ended up

are clear: the mistakes

the calculations printers

which could be made during printing, would have to make to ensure that each page

in its right place in the volume, and the difficulties the binder encountered when he was collating the sheets. This serves to show just how complicated the task of the early printers was, in this as in so many

other facets of printing, up to the time when, in the light of experience,

standard practices came to be adopted in the course of the i6th century. The uniform conventions and tricks of the trade developed at that time
often continued in use

up to the i9th century and sometimes to our

own

day.

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

77

6

The Chinese Precedent*

We know

that

by inventing paper the Chinese indirectly contributed to

the discovery of printing in Europe. 103 Nothing discovered so far suggests that we owe China any more than that, despite the fact that for

nearly five hundred years before Gutenberg the Chinese knew how to print with moveable characters. country in which scholars have had a uniquely influential role in

A

society,

China more than anywhere else venerated learning as a welllife, and her vast literature has grown richer from age to age. The most ancient written records indicate that the book was in
spring of

existence as early as the Chang dynasty (1765-1 123 B.C.). On fragments of bone and on the scales of tortoise shells, which were split with redhot pokers for purposes of divination, nearly 2,500 different characters

have been made out, the ancestors of the 80,000 characters of today.

At that date we quite often

find the

pictogram which

still

today

signifies

the thin sections of a Chinese book. Consisting of four vertical lines crossed horizontally with a large loop, it represents, in fact, the book in
its

most ancient form, made out of wooden or bamboo
a

tablets inscribed

kind of varnish, the whole pointed stylus dipped bound and held together by leather thongs or silk cords. These books made of wooden slats were used for hundreds of years. Confucius used
vertically with
in a
this

type of book to study the l-Ching and we are told that his study was so intensive that the thongs snapped three times. The most ancient

Chinese books to survive were excavated

at the

beginning of

this

century from the deserts of Central Asia strips of wood and bamboo on which are to be found vocabularies, calendars, medical prescriptions and
official

documents

relating to the daily

life

of the Chinese garrisons

guarding the Silk Route, most of them bearing dates from 98 to 137 A.D. 104 They reflect a degree of technical progress, for they are written
in ink brush. Such books however were cumbersome, and the strips had to be laboriously re-corded everytime the cord was broken. They were soon replaced by silk, which was supple, light in weight and yet strong. Woven silk, about 30 cm in width, was rolled round a wooden

rod, which was decorated at either end, and the Chinese name for a book meant 'roll' (as did the Latin
* This section
is

by

Mme

M.

R. Guignard, Keeper in the Department of Manuscripts of

the Bibliotheque Nationale.

With silk so costly they sought cheaper substitutes. By a process of and error, using first silk waste, and then materials which were even more readily available - old linen rags, fish nets, hemp, mulberry bark, they succeeded in making a paste which, when dry, would take
trial

A powerful Chinese tradition maintained that all benefits emanated from the Emperor's Court and so the invention of paper was ascribed to the Director of the Imperial Workshops, the eunuch Tsai Lun (died 121 A.D.) but it appears certain that paper was used for
writing.
to the
It was he who reported on the subject Emperor (105 A.D.) and this report has survived, so his name is remembered while the efforts of many anonymous craftsmen have been

writing long before Tsai Lun.

forgotten.

The most

ancient paper that has survived also

comes from Central

Asia: seven letters written in Sogdian on sheets carefully folded and bearing the address to which they were to be sent. Sir Aurel Stein dis-

covered them in the ruins of a tower on the Great Wall abandoned by the
Chinese army in the mid-2nd century A.D. 106 Microscopic analysis by Professor J. von Wiesner has revealed that the paste was made solely

from cloth of hemp, bits of which are still intact. 107 We know for certain that the paper was made in China and, as it was used by foreigners far from the centres of production, this proves that the new discovery must have spread rapidly. Paper thus replaced silk, except for luxury manuscripts. Sheets of small size, about 25 cmX45 cm, were glued end to end to form long strips which could be rolled or unrolled and were attached
to a supporting rod.

The

walled-in library in the caves of

Tuen Huang

was the source of nearly 1 5,000 manuscripts dating from the jth century to the end of the loth, now divided between the British Museum, the Bibliotheque Nationale and the Peking National Library. For the most part they are rolls of paper but there are also to be found among them the different forms of book which the invention of printing was destined
to modify.
It was probably the need to find a particular passage in a text straightaway, without having to unroll yards of paper, combined with a pious wish to emulate the sacred books of India which are written on long, narrow palm leaves bound together with fine twine, as well as the task of

combining sheets which had been printed
transformed the appearance of the book.

separately,

which eventually

manuscripts from Tuen Huang are texts written on leaves of paper pierced with holes through which a fine cord passed. Instead of being separate, the leaves are sometimes stuck together along the outer edges, making an oblong

Among the

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

73

book which opens

like

an accordion and which the Chinese

call a

which the pages could be turned backward or forward at will. So quickly was this type of book adopted into general use that the Arab writer Mohammed Ibn Ishaq remarked in 989: 'The Chinese write their religious books and their works of scholarship on sheets of paper which open like a fan'. This type of book, in form half Indian, half Chinese, has continued to be used for Buddhist and Taoist texts, for collections of prints, paintings, and examples of calligraphy. But, unsupported, the paper tore easily, and the next advance was to fold each sheet in half down the centre, the leaves
'whirling book' to describe the rapidity with

being bound together along the fold yet remaining free to flutter like wings, hence the name 'butterfly book'. This type of book, the equivalent of our own, was perfect for carrying a manuscript text, but it was only
possible to print a text, using the technique of rubbing the sheet

on

a

block which had been engraved in relief and inked, on one side of the leaf. So, to hide the blank verso they began to fold the leaves in two and

sew them together, not along the folds, but along the edges. The fine pliable paper used in China, Korea and Japan was well adapted to this method of binding which has hardly changed even today. A paper or silk cover protected each quire which often corresponded to a chapter. These were assembled six or eight at a time and secured between thin sheets of
to

precious

horizontally
his eyes.

or in boxes covered with a rich fabric. The books lay on shelves and, as each quire carried the title of the text it contained on its spine, the reader had an outline of the contents before

wood

The Chinese were not only concerned with the convenience of readers
in libraries

of multiplying

and were soon looking for practicable and economical ways texts. About the beginning of our era they had attained a
art

remarkable mastery of the

marble

steles,

on which were engraved

of engraving, producing both huge classical texts, and talismans,

which were used by Buddhist and Taoist monks to provide copies of magic formulae or devotional pictures. Printing direct from engraved stones was an excellent method for the
reproduction of texts and pictures, and, since the steles were intended to preserve the integrity of a text, to commemorate an event or to pay
tribute to an individual, this process could be used to

make souvenirs
changed and has

for pilgrims. This technique of making prints has never

never lost favour as a rapid and cheap means of text reproduction. The tough yet pliable paper of China can be moulded to the engraved surface

by rubbing and hammering

it.

When damp,

the paper penetrates deep

74
into the incisions in the stone

and the surface

is

then ink-stamped in

black or colour.

and, when out in white on a black or coloured background. It was however the development of the seal engraved in
reverse which led most directly to the printing of books.

Only the sunken portions escape contact with the ink the paper separates itself from the stone as it dries, they stand
relief

and

in

By the beginning

of our era, seals engraved in relief were common, and the pious had them engraved with lengthy religious texts; soon such prayers were added to the large portraits of Buddha or the bodhisattvas which were

produced to adorn monks' cells or the rooms of pious laymen. The engravers' skill became greater and greater; moreover impressions of
high quality could be made on paper while this technique was of no use on silk. As in the West, so in China, once a suitable medium had been found experiments multiplied, and the engravers tried bolder enterprises. Tracts were soon being produced as well as prayers, and they were in turn followed by short devotional works and by popular texts calendars
:

or dictionaries.

The earliest evidence we have of such wood-blocks engraved in relief of the Buddha discovered by Paul Pelliot, near Kuche in Sinkiang, which he dates from the mid-8th century A.D. The Tuen Huang Collection in the Bibliotheque Nationals includes a great number of
is

a small portrait

devotional prints with prayers attached (9th century), but it is the British Museum which has the privilege of preserving the oldest dated printed

book

in the

world, a long

roll
is

printed by a xylographic process in the

year 868.

The Buddhist

sophisticated in

preceded by a frontispiece, which is both and delicately engraved, proof that the art composition
text

was already well advanced. It required a century, at least, to overcome the opposition of the scholars who thought it sacrilegious to use such a process for printing classical texts and who seem to have feared that their
trade as copyists would be threatened. Originally a craft confined to the upper

and lower reaches of the Yellow River, block-printing was eventually adopted by the scholars to preserve and disseminate the canonical writings. As such it was

recommended officially by a government minister, Feng Tao, in a report to the Emperor. Like Tsai Lun's, this report has survived. These two men are still credited with the honour of inventions which they did no
more than bring
to the notice of the Court. Feng Tao proposed, in 932 A.D., to preserve the classical texts by block-printing as a last resort because the dynasty in power did not have the financial means to undertake the engraving of a series of 'Classics

On Stone',

such as would have

The Technical Problems and

their Solution

//

been possible in more prosperous times. The success of this project, which took from 932 to 95 3, sanctified the new art, and little by little all the existing literature was put into print. Attempts were quickly made
to

improve on the newly adopted method, but copper engraving and experiments with moveable letters were not successful.

The first attempts to print in moveable type (1041-1048) are attributed
to a blacksmith
to

and alchemist, Pi Sheng,

who used clay and a liquid paste

make letters which he hardened in fire. The composing was done on an iron plate coated with a mixture of paper ash, wax and resin, and the
letters

were held in place by an iron frame. By gently heating the mixture

letting it grow cold he made the characters adhere perfectly to the plate, and they could be recovered by reheating them once the page had been printed. 108 By engraving the very hard wood of the juniper tree, or casting lead and copper, attempts were made to make founts of

and then

moveable characters, but this was always an exceptional technique in China. It was however used in some grandiose imperial projects in the
1

A

8th century like the Ku Chin Tu Chou Tsi Cheng encyclopaedia of 10,000 chapters, for which copper characters were engraved, not cast. new scheme for arranging the characters by 214 key symbols which

was adopted for the great dictionary printed by Emperor Kang Hsi gave some hope of a practical system of locating, and of distributing
after use, the tens

of thousands of characters, but the cost of such a fount

was comparatively unimportant. No individual could have financed such an enterprise, or engaged such a work force, or kept such a vast
in a usable order. Further, the fluid quality of the ink used in China hardly lent itself to printing in metal; and, lastly, the printed book was unattractive on aesthetic and sentimental grounds,

and the manpower needed to carry out the printing was so high that only the government could attempt it. These enormous publications were offered to civil servants and mandarins as working books, and their cost

number of characters

since
style

it deprived the reader of the pleasure of fine calligraphy and of the of such and such a calligrapher working in harmony with his text.

Wood-block engraving and block-printing, by contrast, make possible of the calligrapher's style. Only in the 20th century was moveable type again adopted, and then only for newspapers and
a faithful reflection

popular editions.

who

While publication in China was often subsidised by private individuals insisted on traditional wood-block methods, in Korea the public authorities took over responsibility for the diffusion of texts, and printing
by means of moveable type found
its fullest

development

there.

76

The technique was

first

used in Korea in the

first

half of the i3th

century and acquired extraordinary importance

in the ijth century

through the encouragement of the local King Sejong. His decree of 1403 gives a clear indication of his enlightened policies 'To govern it is
:

necessary to spread knowledge of the laws and the books so as to satisfy reason and to reform men's evil nature in this way peace and order may
;

be maintained.

Our country is in the East beyond the sea and books from
Wood-blocks wear out
easily

China are

scarce.

and besides

it is

difficult

to engrave all the books in the world. I want letters to be made from copper to be used for printing so that more books will be made available.

This would produce benefits too extensive to measure.
that the people should bear the cost of such

It is

not

fitting

work, which

will be

borne

by the Treasury.' The fount of 100,000 sorts cast at the instigation of this decree was the first of several. In the course of a century ten founts were

made and kept

in the official

government printing shops.

109

The

first

three founts (1403, 1420 and 1434) thus preceded the date of the invention

of printing in Europe. Another of China's neighbours, the Uighurs, a Turkic people, also appear to have used this technique which was suited to their writing,

about

had an alphabet. A collection of Uighur characters engraved 300 on small cubes of wood was discovered by P. Pelliot in Tuen Huang. It is unlikely that these Turkic nomads, though in contact with
for they
1

the West, introduced printing to Europe. If we except the testimony of Rashi ed-Din, physician to the Mongol rulers of Iran in the early i4th century, no traveller ever mentioned the

been aroused by the

use of printing in Asia. European interest does not even appear to have first xylographs to arrive from the East, some bright
red seals printed on messages from the Mongol emperors of Persia to the kings of France and England, and to the Pope two examples, dated 1289 and 1305, are preserved in the national archives in Paris. Marco
;

Polo, usually so curious about everything, marvelled at the banknotes he saw in China, but did not perceive that they had been printed from engraved blocks. So the possibilities inherent in this technique, which

proved so

essential to the evolution of

humanity, seem to have escaped
it

the notice of travellers, or at least

nobody thought

worth recording

anything about

it

in writing.

The Book

:

Its

3

Visual Appearance
Let us open the books and see how they changed their appearance in the course of time, and for what reasons.

The

earliest

incunabula looked exactly like manuscripts. The

first

printers, far

from being innovators, took extreme care to produce exact imitations. 110 The 42-line Bible for example was printed in a letter-type which faithfully reproduced the handwriting of the Rhenish missals. For a long time printers did not merely use the same individual characters but also groups of letters linked by the same ligatures as those used in manuscripts. For an even longer time initials in printed books were rubricated by the same calligraphers and illuminated by the same artists

who worked on
or not
it is

manuscripts. So
a

much

is

this the case that the

layman

sometimes has to examine
this. It

book very carefully before deciding whether

printed or handwritten. Many theories have been advanced to has been suggested, for example, that it was to deceive explain the buyer who might distrust the new mechanical process or that it was intended to pass off printed books as manuscripts in order not to offend
the susceptibilities, or even arouse the

unwelcome

attention, of copyists

and

111 jealous of their monopolies. Such theories do not stand up to examination. A desire to deceive the

their 'Guilds',

which were

buyer?

Any such deceit would be easily spotted because a ijth-century would be more acute in detecting such things than our eyes and eye would have quickly distinguished a manuscript from a printed book despite all the resemblances. Besides, people soon came to prefer printed texts which were more readable and accurate than the older manuscripts. Resistance from copyists and stationers? Certainly. But we must not forget that most of them were subject to strict university control and were not strictly speaking members of an autonomous
corporate body. Consequently they were under university authority which was favourably disposed to printing in its early days, so that the
scribes'

complaints were in fact ineffectual. Besides, printers and

stationers

sometimes seem to have collaborated.
77

If copyists

undoubtedly

complained about the rivalry of those newcomers, the printers, the booksellers who specialised in the sale and trade of manuscripts did not

same view. In many cases, in Paris or Avignon for were example, they quite prepared to sell printed books and manuscripts each other. Many of them, sensing the obvious importance alongside
necessarily take the

new method of reproducing texts, went into printing themselves or helped finance the establishment of printing shops. Antoine Verard, for example, produced printed books which were often on vellum and
of the

were faithful copies of the de luxe manuscripts he had had written and painted when he directed a scribal workshop. previously That the earliest printers scrupulously copied, and often indeed
illuminated, and
slavishly reproduced, the manuscripts in front of them, should hardly be a matter of surprise. Nor does it require fanciful theories to account for
it; it

could not have been otherwise.

How could

they have imagined a

printed

form of the manuscripts on which they were in fact modelled? And would not the identity of book and manuscript be the most obvious proof of their technical triumph, as well as
in the

book other than

the guarantee of their commercial success ? The advent of the printing press did not mean a sudden change in the appearance of the book. It

we must now try to trace, so by which the printed book moved by degrees away from its original model, the manuscript. We must also explain why and to what extent its appearance varied in the first hundred years of its existence, before it assumed, in the mid i6th century, an appearance which is essentially the same as the one it has today.
was the
first

phase in an evolution which

as to isolate the various stages

I

Type Founts
when printing was invented, texts were being written, to their contents or their intended recipients, in very different according hands. In fact four main styles of script were current, each with its own
Around
1450,
specific purpose.
112

Firstly, the

'black letter' beloved of theologians
letters: the missal letter

gothic of scholastic texts, the traditional and university professors. Then the

larger size gothic, less rounded, with straight uprights and fractured used for ecclesiastical books. Next a script derived from that used in the Chancelleries (each of which had its own
:

tradition)

the 'bastard' gothic, a hand current in luxury manuscripts in

The Book :
the vernacular and in
last

Its

Visual Appearance

79

some Latin texts, generally narratives. Finally, the to emerge, but that with the greatest future which became the normal script for printed books: the 'littera antiqua', the humanist, or roman

script. Inspired by the Carolingian minuscule, this script was made fashionable by Petrarch and his disciples but in 1480 was used only by a

few exclusive groups of humanists, or by aristocratic book collectors who wanted their classical texts to have a look of antiquity and authenticity

authenticity) to contrast

about them (or at least of what was taken to represent antiquity and them not only in content but also in appearance
texts.

with the medieval

With

this

roman

script there can be associated a

cursive script, the Cancelleresca, based on the handwriting used by the Vatican Chancellery about the middle of the 1 5 th century, and used

afterwards in the Chancelleries of Florence, Ferrara and Venice; this

was the origin of italic.
This rapid

summary of what was

in reality a

much more complex

set

of overlapping styles, defying rigid classification, must not mislead the reader. Intermediate styles of all kinds are extant between the four ideal
types just enumerated the gothic used by the scribes of Bologna, for example, was influenced by the humanist script and there existed con; ;

siderable regional variations within each type of script. The Parisian bastarda type, which was born in the Royal Chancellery and was used in

vernacular manuscripts, and which was to inspire the type of Verard and of Le Noir, differed from the bastarda used in the Low Countries to reproduce the texts of John of Bruges, which was in turn the model for
the type produced by the Bruges printer, Colard Mansion. In fact, regional characteristics were so marked a feature that the experienced

eye can assign a manuscript to a particular locality with ease. Such were the different models that were available to early printers and this diversity explains the extraordinary variety of the letters used in
;

first incunabula and even in early 16th-century books. There was a conventional type for each class of book and reader, just as there had been in the manuscript period for the clerk or scholar, scholastic books

the

:

or manuals of canon law printed in black letter; for the layman, vernacular narratives printed in bastarda type for the admirer of a polished style, editions of the Latin classics and of their humanist emulators,
;

printed in roman.
partners, who the Sorbonne

typical instance is provided first brought printing to Paris. They

A

by Gering and his were summoned to

roman
later,

by humanist men of letters, and so naturally they used shop they set up under university patronage. But when they left the university and set up shop in the Rue St. Jacques,
in the printing

So

producing law texts and the Schoolmen for a larger reading public students and lawyers, they used gothic. Some printers went further
imitating manuscript handwriting, as did

of"

in

Le

Talleur, a printer

of Rouen,

the English bookseller of Norman extraction.

who published two treatises on Anglo-Norman law for Richard Pynson, To do this work he cast a

type quite different from his normal model, and tried to copy the cursive 113 script used peculiarly by English scribes for this class of work.

When

Gradually, printing became more uniform for quite material reasons. the trade of letter founding had not yet started, printers had to

make their own punches, and even a single fount cost a small fortune. As each printer could afford to possess only a small number of founts it
not impossible to cut or acquire one identical with the of a script particular manuscript he wished to print. The sale of copies of the same edition in different towns and countries and, even more important, the nomadic careers of the first printers, inevitably led to the
difficult if

was

development of uniform types, especially as the scripts of the different regions often varied only slightly between each other. It is true that the
first

German

printers

who

left

the Rhineland to teach

Europe the new

attempted at first to imitate the local scripts. In Italy they copied the humanist script, and, even more often, the round script of the scribes of Bologna. But many of them, particularly those with limited means,
art

could not work like
other than a
little

this.

Having

set

out from

home and with no

capital

equipment, a few matrices and some punches, they

used founts already cut although far from their own locality. Hence we can follow the journey of a black letter from Basel, for example, to

Lyons, to Toulouse, and on
first

as far as Spain. 1 14 Similarly, the letters in the

books printed at Lyons, which were printed by Le Roy, were cut in Germany. 115 In England for quite a long time they used letters which came from Rouen and Paris. 116
Regional styles were the first to disappear. Then, more slowly, the major forms of script were standardised until eventually the new roman type
in the greater part of Europe in Italy, France, parts of Switzerland, Spain and England. The distinctive story of roman was a triumph of the humanist spirit, the story of a victory which deserves

triumphed

-

telling.

Roman

script

was made fashionable by small groups of

Italian

humanists, notably Petrarch and Niccolo de'Niccoli who were passionate
calligraphers like many contemporary literati. They wished to impart to classical texts a physical appearance closer to their original look, and

The Book :
certainly different

Its

Visual Appearance

81

from the medieval texts which they derided as 'gothic' - the term also used contemptuously by Alberti to describe the ornamentation of traditional architecture.

Soon, roman spread through Italy as copyists used it in the scriptoria of Naples, Rome and, in particular, Florence. Collectors who included princes, bishops, abbots, cardinals, bankers and rich merchants bought
manuscripts in the

new

style.

The

richest of them, Mathias Corvinus,

King of Hungary, the Kings of Naples, the Dukes of Ferrara, all of whom
had their

own

scriptoria,

ordered their scribes to use the

new

script to

copy Latin texts of the classics and even the works of the Fathers of the Church. Outside Italy, Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, and, later, George d'Amboise, Archbishop of Rouen, owned 'humanist' manuscripts in their private libraries.

Thus when printing
(let

first

appeared

cer-

tain small

groups, lovers of

belles lettres

us not say humanists),

appreciated and

knew how

to read the

new

script,

but of course the vast

majority

at that

time were faithful to the traditional gothic.

Wishing to reach the widest possible clientele printers naturally began by using traditional types. But already in Italy roman was in regular use and there were many book lovers who wanted to possess texts in the alphabet inspired by antiquity, which were still relatively rare in manuscripts.

Many

of these 'amateurs' financed or encouraged the establish-

ment of printing shops so that printing very quickly publicised the script which Petrarch and his like had made fashionable. Sweynheym and Pannartz, who worked at Subiaco and then in Rome and were the first printers to set up in Italy, began with a semi-roman letter and later a more characteristic roman (1465-1467). From around this time Adolf Rusch, a Strasbourg printer, also possessed a roman script which he had used for his edition of Rabanus Maurus's Encyclopaedia before 1467. In
1469 the German Johannes da Spira in Venice employed a similar script for an edition of Cicero's Epistolae adfamiliares, and, while Gering used a type like that of Sweynheym and Pannartz, Nicolas Jenson in Venice
printed Cicero's Epistolae ad Atticum in a

roman

still

regarded as a

masterpiece today.

119

But only a few books before 1480 were

in

roman, and

in

Germany

for

example only ten

roman founts

are

known

before that date. Amateurs

desiring that type were few and the market quickly saturated. While printers who catered for it (mainly publishers of classics) were in financial difficulties by 1472 because of overproduction. Gering and his associates
in Paris, as we have seen, abandoned the

Sorbonne for the Rue St. Jacques,

82

and switched from roman to the traditional black

letter.

In Spain the

Fleming Lambert Palmart began by printing the works of Fenollar in Valencia in roman script, but his example was scarcely followed. Most workshops equipped themselves with gothic the bastarda form was the favourite to print for example Villon's Grant Testament, the farce de Pathelin, romances of chivalry, chronicles and popular tales in French, Shepherds' Calendars, and the Ars Moriendi. The large form of gothic also came in, for the works of Ockham, Nicholas de Lyra and the many commentaries of Peter Lombard. Gradually, the fashion for humanist scripts, and the wide diffusion of Italian editions in which roman was used, made its victory inevitable, soon followed by that of its associated fount, italic. Venice played a big part in the eventual domination of roman and italic. There Aldus had his roman cut which exercised an enormous influence over 16th-century type
founders, while his
resca script,
italic,

cut in

1

501 by Francesco Griffo after a cancelle-

120 permitted a lengthy text to be printed in a short space.

Following the Venetian example, Amerbach (who was trained in Venice) and, after him, Froben increasingly adopted roman and italic, spreading their use into Germany and encouraging it in France. In Lyons, the
Venetian type was quickly copied, and Balthasar de Gabiano and Barthelemy Trot made imitations of Aldine italic. In Paris, Joost Bade

and Henri Estienne spread the use of roman, and between 1530 and 1 540 a whole series of romans were used by Robert Estienne, Simon de

Wechel and Antoine Augereau, some being attributed tradifamous Garamond, though it is not possible to say which. These scripts, more perfect than those which had inspired them, rapidly became standard throughout Europe. It was these scripts which were sought and copied by Paulus Manutius and Plantin and which were bought at Frankfurt by Egenolff. Punches cut at this period were acquired by foundries being set up at the time and continuously used
Colines,
tionally to the
until the :8th century.

Roman grew constantly in importance as humanism spread. It began to be used to print vernacular texts, until then traditionally printed in gothic bastarda. Thus in 1529 Galiot Du Pre 'rejuvenated' the presentaRoman de la Rose and the works of Alain Chartier he did the same for Villon's Grant Testament in 1532 because the public for these works had come to prefer roman 121 which thenceforth was used each year in an increasing number of editions. But the new letter did not enjoy complete acceptance. For some time, university professors contion of the
;

tinued to prefer the black letter;

it

only disappeared in the following

The Book :
decades,

Its

Visual Appearance

8)

first from law manuals and then from theology, and it continued even longer in liturgical works. In particular the huge numbers of bourgeois and townsmen, accustomed to decipher manuscript,

remained attached to gothic bastarda which resembled it more than roman or italic. Rabelais' Gargantua, to be bought by a huge public at

and elsewhere, was printed in black letter. For a long time, therefore, gothic bastarda was used to print popular books, almanacs and 'gothic booklets'. The poorer printers ran off thousands of these,
the

Lyons

fair

wearing out their founts
richer colleagues

in the process

and buying

cast-offs

from

their

who no longer wanted them. Only

later, in the

second

half of the i6th century, when obliged to restock with new types, did they acquire the roman which the public had grown to expect.

Thus the roman

script

century after printing.

was being used throughout Europe within a This triumph of a design artificially made for the

lovers of Latin classical texts is less surprising when we remember that Latin was the international language and that the Latin book trade was
also international.

The
a

frequently have been
result that

hindrance to the

extraordinary variety in letter forms must sale of editions abroad, with the

tional alphabet.

roman eventually took on the character of a sort of internaBut if it was quickly adopted for the publication of
Italy,

vernacular texts in

and then,

after

much

resistance, in France

and

Spain, and eventually in England, it never completely won over readers in the Germanic countries. Certainly, Latin texts were printed in roman

continued to be printed in black

Countries, but most vernacular texts In the i6th century two kinds of gothic made their appearance which have lasted to the present day: Umlaut and Schwabacb. 1 ** They were easier for most readers and were
in

Germany, Austria and the

Low

letter.

taken up in the trade. So Luther, whose first works were printed in roman, reverted to the national type face when he wanted to reach the mass of his compatriots. Thus on the one side we have the Latin world

and England, and on the other side the Germanic world where for a long time the majority of works were printed in a different script. At the same time in the Slav countries, printers adopted a different script entirely: Cyrillic, adapted from ancient Greek script.
2

Inside the

Book

:

Title Page,
that

Colophon and
a

Printer's

Mark
on

The

reader today

knows

when he opens

new book he

will find

the the

title

book or not: author,

page the basic information necessary to decide whether to read title, place of publication, publisher and date.

In theory the law insists on this, at least in France. But in the 1 5th and even the i6th century this was not the case. There

was no title page in the first books men had to turn the pages to see what the book contained, and just what it was. As in manuscripts, the text began on the recto of the first leaf, immediately after a brief form of
;

words giving the subject of the work and occasionally the author's name. At least until the beginning of the i6th century, the reader would find most of his information at the end of the book in the 'colophon', a residue from the manuscript: it was there that he could expect to find the name of the printer, place of publication, perhaps the title and the

name of the

author.

However, from the i5th century another element appeared, an identifying sign called the printer's mark made with a wood-cut and included with either incipit or colophon. At first it was often simply an outline of the mark printers placed on consignments of books they were
carters.

sending to customers, originally intended for the convenience of Appearing on a blank page at the end of the last gathering or directly above the colophon, it became a species of pictorial publicity not

only telling the book's origin but adorning it and affirming its quality. Booksellers and printers had their house sign reproduced as their device and, when the fashion for allegories and emblems inspired by antiquity

grew
tree,

developed with the triumph of humanism, a complicated symbolism up. Aldus used an anchor, Kerver a unicorn, Estienne an olive
Galiot Du Pre a ship (a galley, after his first name). The mark once relegated to the last page commonly appears on the title page, which became general usage from the end of the 1 5th century.

The
the

story of the

'civil status'

of a

- its page purpose to indicate to the reader the book is a curious one and typical of the evolution of
title
is

book

as a whole. It

instructive

inasmuch

as

it

shows us how new
easier to use.

ideas

emerged which

led to

new ways of making books

always had a tendency to soil, printers conceived the idea of starting the text on the verso, leaving the recto blank. Then, from a quite natural desire to fill in the blank, they printed
Since the recto of the
first leaf

a short title

on
this
its

it

and

this

was in 1480, and
It

way

that the

utility

12 * helped to identify the book. title page made its debut between 1475 and soon became obvious. In France, publishers

The Book :

Its

Visual Appearance

8;

concerned with the appearance of their books, Verard, for example, began to decorate the page with large initials often adorned with grotesque figures. Others put their mark in the blank space beneath
particularly

the

title,

or perhaps a wood-cut like the one in Alexandre Villedieu's

Doctrinal, a study book for beginners, showing a teacher and pupils. In other popular booklets, a master key would be shown. At the end of the ijth century nearly all books had title pages, but

they were not quite like those of today. Beginning brief, they soon grew to inordinate length, and in the first third of the i6th century, in a
fill the entire page, publishers tended to embed the title in a often formula, long adding an indication of the principal parts of the book, and some verses of the author and his friends. Publishers also, in

desire to

adopted the habit of printing their name the foot of the page. But it was still necessary to turn to the back of the book and look at the colophon to find more precise informatheir desire for publicity, quickly
at

and address
tion - the

name of the printer for example and the precise date of printing. At the same time, more and more care was taken to decorate the title page. The fashion for engraved frames spread. Baldung-Grien was using them in Strasbourg from 1510, for Knobloch, Schott and then for
Griininger.
to Paris,
style.
I2 5

A little later Holbein designed a large number of frames for
it

Froben in Basel. Then the new style spread to Nuremberg, Augsburg and

where Joost Bade reproduced

in a decorative architectural

In the

German countries and England this fashion for frames persisted

title often drowned in a long formula and surrounded by multiple signs. But the Aldi in Italy, and humanist publishers in France, like Simon de Colines, and the Estienne and de Tournes

for a long time, with the

houses, attempted to clarify the presentation of the

title

page.

From

around 1530, the time of the triumph of humanism, more and more new books were to be found with short titles accompanied by only the name of the author and, at the bottom of the page, the publisher's address. Thus, at the same time as roman and italic script began to prevail, the
title

page gradually assumed

its

current form.

The replacement of the wood-cut by copper engraving brought new changes in the title page at the end of the i6th century. The title pages of most books looked the same, but it became noticeable, first of all in
the large and carefully prepared folio editions, and subsequently in volumes of all kinds, that the technique of the framed title page was
into favour. Originally the title was often placed in the centre of an engraved frame. But this method called for a delicate

coming back

86
technique, that of double imposition. In contrast to wood-cuts, typeset words of the title could not be printed at the same time as the copper engraving. Besides, the thick black look of the type did not harmonise

happily with the elegant thin lines of the engraving. So a technique was soon devised whereby both title and decoration were engraved on the

From then on, the title page became the concern of artists and alone, they were quite naturally inclined to develop the decorative at the aspect expense of the written text. Gradually illustration came to whole of the page's surface, and the address of the publisher the occupy
same
plate.

and the date of publication were relegated to a single line at the bottom of the page, while the title was inscribed in the open pages of a book, or on a plinth or draped hangings placed in the centre of the page. The
engravings after Rubens which Moretus used in his books were like 127 this, as were many others in the first half of the iyth century. They
simplicity,

seem excessive to our modern eyes, accustomed as we are to more and certainly in no other area was the baroque style so

book decoration. In particular, the design of religious works too often became the pretext for an artist of as great a talent as Rubens to create compositions containing multiple figures, each with allegoric meaning so complicated as to impair the vitality of the ensemble. Simpler work was that of Thomas de Leu in France, or Leonard
excessive as in

who put the title within the centre of an architectural portico. Michel Lasne, who had worked in Antwerp, imitated Rubens but avoided allegories and overembellished compositions. Soon, in 1640,
Gautier,

Poussin, asked to design the publications of the Imprimerie Royale, brought a new approach which caught on immediately and revolutionised design. 128 He went for clarity of outline with just a few figures clothed in antique drapery in a design of wholly classical simplicity. But, as a painter, like Rubens, his first concern was for the unity of his

composition and he relegated the title far from the centre of the page. In his work, the purely ornamental engraved title became the frontis- which meant publishers piece, an illustration at the front of the book

had to concentrate bibliographic information on
page following the frontispiece.
utility

From

was proving indispensable, more

a purely typographical then on, the title page, whose or less assumed the form it still

has today.

The Book :

Its

Visual Appearance

87

The Text and Format of the Book

3

The move towards a simpler, more uniform product was equally apparent
in the appearance of the text.

But evolution here,

as in every other

feature of book production, was a gradual process. To understand happened, first consider the difficulties confronting scholars

what and

It was impossible to cite page referdo habitually nowadays, because the leaf signature or the on which the page passage was to be found would vary with each hence the manuscript chapter number or its heading had to be quoted and even the paragraph, and the text often had to be arranged by subparagraphs for ease of reference. Again, books were written in a crabbed hand, full of contractions because of the need to economise with expensive vellum, so that as much as possible was crammed on to a page, with no space between paragraphs or chapters, no headings or page layout. It is easy to see therefore why manuscripts were difficult both to decipher and to consult. The first printed books were, as we have seen, exactly like manuscripts, with the same general arrangement, the same abbreviations and the same crabbed writing. Gradually, the lines became more spacious, the script became bigger and the abbreviations less numerous. But the

students during the manuscript age.

ences as

we

;

presentation remained almost the same. There is hardly any difference between a manuscript of Aristotle or of Lancelot produced between

1480 and 1490 and the same works printed in, say, 1520. Only when public taste gave rise to a new form of literature and roman script came into general use, was the presentation of the text modified.

It is

characteristic that signatures

were

first

printed in books not for the

convenience of readers but to guide the work of artisans in preparing a book, particularly in binding, which was a very delicate task in a period when each section to be bound might have an unequal number of leaves,

and each sheet be

inset in a different

imitated scribes and added a table

on which was
leaf.

way. So, to help the binder, printers listed the first word of

each gathering or of each double

This table was called the

register.

view they began designating each section with a letter of the alphabet usually printed at the bottom and to the right of the
in

With the same aim

sheet.

The

letters

were followed by

a

number, to show the sequence of

the leaves (the 'signature'). Probably for the same reason they began numbering the leaves (it is noteworthy that the earliest pagination has no signatures and vice versa). Be that as it may, the practice of showing the

sequence of the leaves was slow to develop. Many books were not paginated as late as the beginning of the 1 6th century and what pagina-

was was often faulty. It took even longer before books were no longer numbered by the leaf but, as today, by the page. Perhaps the
tion there
first

example of pagination
it

is

(1499); but

became common only

Aldus' edition of the Cornucopia of Perotti in the second quarter of the i6th

century, thanks mainly to humanist printers. From then on, the book began to have a contemporary look. triumphant humanism had imposed the use of roman type, which was
usually larger
texts

A

and so more readable than gothic script. More and more page in one long line, not in double columns. At the same time, lines became more spacious, attempts were made to achieve greater clarity and chapter headings were more clearly demarcated through use of white space. Gradually the book assumed its
were
set across the

modern appearance.

As printed texts multiplied the book ceased to be a precious object consulted in a library. People wished to take a book with them and to be
able to transport it easily, to read or consult at any time; hence the growing success of the 'portable format' which also dates from the first

more traditional readers drawn from the clergy, students and the upper classes, the bourgeoisie began to form their own libraries. Quarto and octavo books, though common enough in the 1 5th century, were only for short texts too slight to publish in folio. Books intended for the pulpit were of large format. In fact the main books which systematically used small formats in this period were devotional works, especially Books of Hours. For these books, which were in constant use and already intended for a large market, had to be easily transportable. Another literature produced in small format and intended for an even larger market, was that of popular tales, known from their shape as 'plaquettes gothiques'. But from the end of the ijth century, anxious to ease the reading of classical authors, the Aldi launched their famous 'portable' collection. Taken up by the small humanist readership, this format was adopted
half of the i6th century. In addition to the

increasingly at the beginning of the i6th century. In Paris, for example, Simon de Colines started a series like the Aldines, which found many

The Book :
imitators, particularly at

Its

Visual Appearance

89

Lyons where Venetian models were regularly literary works were systematically published in small handle and consult. If the old romances of chivalry to format, easy continued to appear in folio and quarto, the Latin poems of the humanists, the works of Marot, of Rabelais and of Marguerite of Navarre and the groups of poets known as the Pleiade all came out in small format. It was in this form that Erasmus' Adages spread through Europe, and this too was the form used for the innumerable pamphlets in which Luther and the reformers diffused their ideas. Books with illustrations were often like this as well. Holbein in 1 540 drew little vignettes for a 4 and 8vo edition of Images de la Bible and Simulacres de la Mart which had an enormous success. 129 De Tournes at Lyons and Denis Janot in Paris and printers elsewhere published editions of figures de la Bible and the Emblems of Alciat or Ovid's Metamorphoses. ^ For students and scholars however the folio was still preferred, since although it was more difficult to handle, it was more legible and it was an easier form in which
copied. Soon new
1

to trace references.

Thus the book trade in this period was, more than anything, characterised
in libraries,

by the division between ponderous, learned tomes intended for use and small size literary or polemical works for a larger public.
a contrast

Such
tion,

iyth century.

The period 1600

continued to dominate the history of the book in the to 1650, the age of the Counter-Reforma-

also libraries, in

tion

was one in which France was covered with monasteries which were which Protestant theologians fought a battle of erudiwith the Jesuits, and in which lawyers, imitating the ecclesiastics,

collected great libraries of religious works. The bourgeois classes, apparently, lost the taste for reading they had possessed in the i6th century. Great editions of the sacred texts, and of the Church Fathers,
official

a revival

records of the Great Councils and treatises on canon law enjoyed and large editions in folio multiplied. But for short works in

French, quarto was preferred because it was more readable, although less portable, than octavo editions. The trend was clear. When, for

example, the Elzeviers, cut off from their main suppliers of paper by the Wars, adopted for their editions of classical authors a small format, the
i zmos, of minute type to conserve stocks, their scholarly readership began to complain. In the second half of the iyth century by contrast, a public for imaginative literature was growing again. Novels and

famous

works of popularisation multiplied and economic conditions did not favour the publication of costly works of reference. These were the reasons for the renewed success of the small format. Similarly, in the 1 8th

90

century the folio was hardly used at all except for works of permanent value like dictionaries and encyclopaedias. The types of book which

were customarily published in quarto or octavo - novels, literary works, popular science and polemic and editions of Latin and Greek authors

now

represented the great bulk of

book production.

4
Illustration

Manuscripts were often decorated with miniatures they would be found for example in Books of Hours, missals, devotional works, romances of
;

chivalry and treatises on hunting. But, even more than ordinary manuscripts, illuminated manuscripts, copied by the cleverest calligraphers

and illuminated sometimes by famous painters, were only within the reach of the privileged - nobles, both lay and spiritual, and rich
merchants.

Here again, the invention of printing did not cause any immediate transformation. Illuminators and miniaturists continued to work after
printing began

Bourdichon,
a

who

- think, for example, of the Hours of Anne of Brittany, of died in 1521, or again of Columba. Editors who

book trade, like Verard, when they wished to sell book capable of rivalling luxury manuscripts, had the text illustrated by the same painters who illuminated the manuscripts. But the method was too costly and time-consuming, except perhaps for a few dedicatory copies printed on vellum for important people. When the need came to supply illustrations for the hundreds of copies of the same book - when books became 'democratised' as it were - other means were essential. Mechanical reproduction of texts meant a corresponding method of reproducing pictures.
specialised in the luxury

One method, xylography, had been in common use and applied in standardised production before printed books had appeared. From the end of the i4th century block-prints began to multiply and the xylographic industry was fully developed by the time that the printing industry began. A wood-cut was easily inserted in a forme alongside the
text,

culties,

and simultaneous printing of picture and text presented no diffiso the convention was quickly adopted. In 1461 Albrecht

Pfister
this

of Bamberg conceived the idea of illustrating several books in way; one of them was a small collection of popular fables by Ulrich

The Book:

Its

Visual Appearance

91

Boner, the Edelstein (precious stone). In this first illustrated book, the simple figures in line without shadow, afterwards quickly coloured in

wash, primitive though they might be, were not without charm, and would have seemed quite natural to a public used to seeing block-prints.

Soon Gunther Zainer was turning out illustrated books at Augsburg, popular works and devotional books, while Pfister continued to print
stories illustrated

with cuts, such

as the so-called

Four

Stories (the tales

of

Daniel, Joseph, Judith and Esther). The same process was used by Ulrich Zell at Ulm and many other printers in other German towns. As in block-printing itself, the purpose of the cuts was always to amplify the
text

and make
in

it

concretely

real,

not to produce a

work of art. 131
was flourishing,

Thus

Germany, where

the block-printing industry

printers quickly began to illustrate popular books with wood-cuts and, once the technique was perfected, books of all kinds. Printers from the

Rhine Valley also took blocks with them when they left home to work elsewhere, or cut new blocks themselves for the books they printed.
Thus, the first illustrated books printed all over Europe had a clearly Germanic stamp. In 1467, for example, two years after the appearance of the first printed book in Italy, two German printers in Rome, Sweynheym and Pannartz, published an illustrated edition of Torquemada's
Meditationes with

wood-cuts by

a

German

artist,

and the

first

illustrated

book from Naples, a Boccaccio (1478), was printed by a German called Riessinger with wood-cut illustrations that again appear to be by one of his compatriots. Germanic influence also made itself strongly felt at Venice where so many German printers were in business. The first illustrated book in France that we know of was the Mirouer de la Redemption de I'humain lignaige, printed in Lyons. It was the work of a German, one Matthew Husz, using cuts already used at Cologne in 1474 and at Basel in 1476. At Louvain, Brussels, Bruges, Gouda and Antwerp the style of illustration was again inspired by the Cologne school. Later on German influence is evident in the first illustrated English and Spanish
books.
1

' 2

Everywhere, then, at the beginning, the German influence was predominant, but soon local trends began to emerge and with them the first regional schools. In a few rare instances the cuts may have been made

by local artists, possibly playing-card makers not particularly influenced by German models. There is nothing specifically German about the pictures in the first book from Verona, the De re militari of Valturius

92
(i47 2 )> or
1481.

m

the Missel de Verdun, printed by Jean

Du

Pre at Paris in

The borders of foliage, animals and grotesques which appear here
first

for the
its

beginning

time derive straight from the manuscript tradition. From this style was more flexible than that in Germany in the
It

developed in Paris and from there made itself felt in England. Verard, the great specialist in illustrated books at the end of the 1 5th century, had an agency in London where he published translations of certain of his French works. 133 In Italy however, in

same period.

Rouen and

in

Rome, Naples and Venice, where the first illustrated books had been produced by German printers, local schools came into being, more influenced than elsewhere by fresco painting. Accustomed to a more
sophisticated art, the Italian public showed little interest in book illustrations, until they were adapted to their own tastes. Very quickly, to
satisfy this public,

Italian style

German artists and their - the artist who cut the blocks for
taste for
artist

Italian pupils

adopted the
Meditationes

Torquemada's

may have copied the designs of a of Santa Maria sopra Minerva. A
up
in the

Roman artist influenced by the frescoes
almost oriental richness shows
cut the headpieces for an

work of an unknown
5

who

Aesop,

printed in 148

in Naples

by

a

German working for the

Neapoli-

tan humanist

Tuppo. 134
of illustrators began to

Thus,

in the great publishing centres, schools

grow up, often influenced by local styles of painting and illumination, and by the monumental architecture under their eyes. Each regional
school acquired its own manner, its personal language, and began to specialise. In Florence, for example, printers above all illustrated popular

books designed for a local clientele. In the big commercial cities like Venice and Lyons on the other hand, printing was largely for export,
and printers concentrated on illustrated Bibles and Church books. Lyons also issued popular books and moral tracts, devotional works, and, for a smaller public, translations of the Latin authors best known
to the readers of the time, Terence and Ovid, with pictures of the characters. In Paris illustrated books to suit all tastes were published:

Books of Hours, devotional works, Villon's poetry, farces like those of Pathelin, Church books, histories and chivalric romances. At Gouda, Gerard de Leeu, the premier publisher of illustrated books in the Low Countries, also produced devotional works and romances for the rich merchants of that country. At Nuremberg, Anton Koberger, primarily
a publisher of learned works, produced outstanding illustrated books and employed Wolgemut, the wood engraver, to illustrate the Schat^ebehalter with 91 full-page pictures representing scenes from the Bible

The Book :

Its

Visual Appearance

9)

and
to

allegories (1491).

He

also

had 2,000 cuts made for the

illustrations

Hartmann

Schedel's Liber Chronicarum (1493), better

known

as the

Nuremberg

man

Chronicle, which was brought out simultaneously in Gerand Latin editions, 135 and was sold in France, Italy, Cracow and

Buda. Some years later Koberger illustrated the Revelations of St. frigid with blocks by Diirer (i 500), and the plays of the i ith-century dramatist Hroswita (1501).

manner and language of its own, external felt. Every illustrated book, even the less was known important ones, throughout Europe and often imitated. Chronicle, already mentioned, was copied by Koberger's Nuremberg in at Augsburg 1496, 1497 and 1500. The blocks for the Schonsperger
While each school had
a

influences continued to be

Basel edition of Sebastian Brandt's Ship of Fools (1494) served as a model for Parisian engravers (1497) and Lyonnese (1498). I36 The artists

who copied them

did try to bring off original versions. For instance one of the most famous Parisian illustrated books in the Renaissance, the

Hypnerotomachia Poliphili, was only an adaptation of an edition by Aldus which had appeared fifty years earlier at Venice. But the blocks for the

book were cut in a very different spirit from those of the Italian model the adaptation to French taste comes out in a search for affectaParis
:

tion. Often,

however,

in the

hands of

less skilled

or practised cutters,

or perhaps simply under pressure, the copy became a simple plagiarism. If Venetian engravers of the 1 5th century could assimilate the twofold influence of France and Germany, this was no longer the case in the i6th

when they were busy with orders from printers for the export market and contented themselves with hackneyed copies of foreign models without any effort at originality.
century
In each centre the styles of other, foreign, cities were evident and quite often the blocks used in one place came from another. Often

number of different towns would proceed in Conrad with branches in Basel and Paris, used blocks Resch, way. cut in Basel to illustrate books he published in Paris. Likewise some publishers would often ask their foreign colleagues to have the blocks they needed cut by a local artist of repute. Urs Graf, for example, the famous Basel artist working as an illustrator for Froben, occasionally worked for Matthias Schiirer and Hupfuff of Strasbourg, and for Anshelm of Haguenau, Pierre Vidoue and Conrad Resch of Paris. 137
publishers with shops in a
this

94

Given these circumstances it is easily seen how complex the study of illustrations can be. Even though a minor art, book illustration must be seen as part of the great artistic, intellectual and social movements of its age. But that is not our object, for such a study would require a full volume on its own. One thing that is clear is the importance of illustrations, whether in xylographs or printed books, in the diffusion of iconographic themes. In this context, Emile Male has demonstrated the
influence of the Biblia pauperum and the Speculum humanae salvationis. Already the miniaturist who illuminated the Tres riches heures of the Due
in 1440

de Berry used a manuscript of the Speculum humanae salvationis. Van Eyck and Van der Weyden in 1460 owned copies of this manuscript

work or perhaps a block-book version, and were influenced by it. But it is particularly when the Biblia pauperum and the Speculum were reproduced
as
in

models by

block-book form that they became popular and were adopted artists. The tapestries of Chaise-Dieu and those in the

Rheims were influenced by the same two works, as was a and another in Chalon-sur-Saone. The two great stained glass windows in the Sainte Chapelle of Vic-le-Comte are also copied from the Biblia pauperum and the Speculum. Likewise some sculptures in the main doorway in the church of St. Maurice at Vienne in Dauphine, and the great doorway of the cathedral of Troyes. The same influence can be detected in Limousin enamels and ivory coffers. Similar examples are by no means rare scenes from Books of Hours often influenced the makers of tapestry and glass. Shepherds' Calendars and the Dance of Death (Dame macabre) together with the Books of Hours were also models for mural painters; hence the murals at La FerteLoupiere and Meslay-le-Grenet, inspired by the Dance of Death printed by Guy Marchant and by Coustiau and Menard. On the other hand Marchant's Dance of Death was probably a copy of one in the Cimetiere
cathedral at
tapestry in the cathedral at Sens
:

des Innocents. Later

still, in the i6th century, several enamelists appear to have copied illustrations from books, for example Griininger's Aeneid of 1 5 o i , and the Histoire de la conquete de la Toison d'or of Jean de Meaure-

gard, and pictures in the Illustration des Gaules of Jean

Le Maire de

have inspired tapestry work. Perhaps the most striking examples of the role of book illustration in the diffusion of art are the Bible and the Metamorphoses of Ovid printed
Beiges are
to

known

by Jean de Tournes in 1 5 5 3 and 1557 with vignettes by Bernard Salomon, two works which enjoyed great success, the latter being used as Protestant propaganda. Salomon's illustrations were the inspiration behind many tapestries, silks, enamels, faience pieces, and woodcarvings.

The Book :

Its

Visual Appearance

9]

Many

of pictures were inspired by the same vignettes, either via other wood-cuts, and the page borders in the Metamorphoses or directly
series

served as models in lace pattern books. 138 But let us limit ourselves to a few works taken from the most famous

books of the i6th century and to a few occasion to mention.

artists

whom we shall often have

At

this

Germany and
Diirer's

period of ostentatious display, picture books spread across France. 139 It is impossible to ignore the great series of

(though strictly speaking they were wood engravings), the Apocalypse (1498), the Great Passion (1498-1501), the Life of the Virgin (1502-1510) which came out first as prints, then in book form with
letterpress

accompaniment. From 1512, Diirer was
official

with Schonsperger,

printer to the

Augsburg working Emperor Maximilian, and to

at

celebrate the Emperor's glory he worked on the Triumphal Arch, then on the Triumphs of Maximilian. Hans Burgkmair cut Diirer's designs

and

later collaborated

with Schaufelin and Leonard Beck,

illustrating

the Teuerdank, an allegorical description of the Imperial marriage. Meanwhile the Strasbourg printers, especially Griininger, were

turning out picture books. The Strasbourger, Hans Weiditz the Younger, a pupil of Burgkmair, was perhaps the best painter-engraver of his day

and he

illustrated the

German

Bible for

Knobloch

(1524),

and perhaps

the Glucksbuch of Petrarch published by Steyner at Augsburg in 1532. But his best work without any doubt is the Eicones vivae herbarum by

Otto Brunfels (Schotten,

1

5

30-1

5

36).

While

in the other

works he was

merely seeking to be picturesque, here Weiditz's sole aim was accuracy and he knew just how to render animals and plants with perfect natural-

once more coarse and vulgar another Alsatian, Hans Baldung-Grien, produced 43 blocks for the Hortulus animae of Flach
ness. In a genre at

(1511-12) as well as many blocks for Griininger. Finally, two great engravers of Nuremberg, Joost Amman and Virgil Solis designed many
blocks for the publisher Feyerabend.

Wittenberg

worked at that time for Luther at Froben collaborated with Urs Graf, whom we have already mentioned, and more particularly with Hans and Ambrosius Holbein. Holbein did not himself engrave, but

Remember,

too, that the Cranachs

(see pp. 28yfF.), while at Basel

his

compositions were rendered very skilfully by engravers like Liitzelburger, and it was Liitzelburger without doubt who produced the small
vignettes in the Figures de la Bible published by Trechsel at Lyons in 1538 from Holbein's original designs which are now in the museum at Basel.

French book

illustration yielded

nothing to German. Simon Vostre,

96

the Hardouyns, and later Pierre Vidoue, besides
editions of Books of Hours.

many others, turned out

They blended German and Italian influences and sometimes made them into one. The former came via booksellers of
origin (like Kerver and Wechel) and through the ascendancy of

German
the great
at this

German masters, Diirer, Holbein and Schongauer. The French time made contact with the Renaissance through the mediation of Germany, especially Basel. This was the case with Oronce Fine, a

who cut blocks and borders. The was naturally strong at Lyons where Trechsel, as we have seen, used Holbein's designs. At the same time, Italian influence sometimes came in directly, as for instance in the designs of Geoffroy Tory. Gradually, the French book escaped from foreign influence and
mathematician from the Dauphine,
influence
attained
its

apogee about the 1550'$.
Poliphili,

Among

masterpieces produced

then were the Hypnerotomachia

some of whose blocks have been

attributed to Jean Goujon. It is more probable that the illustrations in an edition of Vitruvius printed by Gazeau in 1547 were made by that

were those in the Entree de Henri II, published in Roffet in was Jean Cousin the Elder who published his Treatise on Perspective (1560). At Lyons Jean de Tournes hired the best painter-engraver in the city, Bernard Salomon, who did some very lively engravings, both expressive and versatile, with backgrounds of the countryside and classic
sculptor, as
1

549. It

temples.

The

pictures he created for the story

La

Coche in

La Marguerite

des Marguerites des princesses (1547)

and

especially the illustrations to
as the illustrated

Quadrins

historiques de la Bible

of Paradin as well

Metamorphoses of Ovid should all be mentioned. success enjoyed by books of this sort.

We shall see later on the

These examples may help to emphasise the importance and high
quality of the illustrated book in the i6th century, a period of great brilliance in that field. Without going further into that aspect of the
subject, let us just recall the kinds of

books

illustrated

between the ijth

and the i8th centuries, what needs they were intended for.

fulfilled

and the public they

Originally we saw that the illustrated book, successor to the block book, had the same aim and the same clientele. It was intended to edify
a

huge public

medium of

that could hardly read, to explain the text through the pictures, to make real and comprehensible the different

episodes in the life of Christ, the prophets and the saints, and to give some reality to the demons and angels who disputed for the souls of
sinners,

and

also to the mythical

the

men

in that age.

and legendary personalities familiar to Such was the aim of xylographs and such was the

The Book :

Its

Visual Appearance

97

first illustrated books. It was not surprising therefore that the most popular illustrated books in the i jth century were works of devotion, pious and moralising, usually in the vernacular. To judge by the catalogues of incunabula the most frequently reprinted illustrated books of the i jth century in France and Germany were stories of the Passion

aim of the

and Life of Christ,

stories of Satan like the Belial of

Jacques de Theramo,

the Mirror of the Redemption and others like the Speculum humanae vitae, the Art de bien mourir et celui de bien vivre, the Golden Legend of Jacques de

Voragine, the Story of the

Bible, the Shepherds' Calendar

and the innumer-

able popular and moralising fables attributed to Aesop, Bidpay and Cato. Book illustration answered a practical rather than an artistic need: to

make graphic and visible what people of the time constantly heard evoked. There is no subtle variation of light and shade, or of tone; just
a

few simple figures cut with clear and obvious features. After the introduction of printing the number of Books of Hours and

romances of chivalry in private hands grew incessantly, and so, soon, did illustrated editions of the Latin authors which people had been
accustomed for a long time to read
in the vernacular, Virgil, for instance.

There was, however, no longer any question of decorating these by hand, as had been done in illuminated manuscripts. So, with some
hesitation,

and often with

regret,

hand illumination was abandoned

in

for example, they tried an intermediate borders which could serve as a picture frame for process using printed the painter, and in Germany complete illustrations were later finished in
their case too.

At Venice,

colour and only the outline printed. Until the beginning of the i6th century a blank space was often retained at the head of chapters for a
initial, although the painters could only finish a small number of the copies printed. To satisfy a public which knew, even if it did not possess, painted

coloured

great care
in

manuscripts treating the same themes, publishers like Verard lavished on their printed books' illustrations, so that they acquired the

sumptuous look of a manuscript. In France Books of Hours, which were
such great vogue, were decorated with masses of small wood-cuts as borders, and more and more attention was devoted to conveying light and shade. In Italy engravings were produced by artists

assembled

who were competing with painters, and so were done more subtly. From about oo hatching becomes common in Venice, often somewhat
1 5

impairing the purity of the wood-cut and robbing
essential feel.

it

of part of

its

9*

felt in

Soon Renaissance influence and the prestige of Italian art made itself the Germanic countries as well as in France. Certainly, the first

humanists, especially those of the late i}th and early i6th centuries, scholars before all else, showed as much disdain for illustrated books as
the theologians of the Sorbonne. Wasn't an illustration merely a simple way to instruct those who were too ignorant to read the text? Thus

scenes intended to illustrate the translations of Terence and

Ovid -

intended, that is, for a public they scorned - could only cause them pain, especially as they were drawn by artists with little concern for archaeology, and for readers

be quite happy

if

who knew nothing about Antiquity, who would the characters of Terence were depicted wearing i5th

century dress. Even when Aldus published his Hypnerotomachia Poliphili, which was more in line with classical feeling, the humanists seemed to have held aloof from this magnificent edition and it was not reprinted in
Venice.
In France, however, the plain decorative frames taken from Italian models by Geoffrey Tory enjoyed a great vogue and were imitated everywhere. Soon Kerver at Paris re-edited the Hypnerotomachia Poliphili, illustrated

by plates inspired by Italian wood-cuts, and this work which had had only a limited success in Venice in 1500, caught on in Paris from 1 5 49. But it was the mathematician, Oronce Fine, whose work had led him to take an interest in book illustration, who established the

fashion for geometrical frames placed around subjects which were often allegorical and true to the spirit of the German Renaissance. For an even

who,

larger public had been won over to the new spirit the children of those in the ijth century, read Aesop's Fables, Scenes from the Bible, the Roman de la Rose, the History of Troy or Lancelot. This new readership

was accustomed to

illustrations and it now desired a form of illustration more appropriate to its tastes. Soon, Holbein and the Basel publishers who employed him were using finely cut small vignettes to illustrate
like the Story of the

popular books,

Old and

the

New

Testament or the

of Ovid. Very quickly, these books were copied and imitated everywhere, at Lyons by de Tournes, at Paris by Janot or Groulleau. In this way, the illustration of texts which had enjoyed such
Illustrated Metamorphoses

a vogue in the 1 5th century, enjoyed an even greater one in the i6th. At the same time, vignettes of this kind were used to illustrate emblem books which, from the middle of the i6th century, began to enjoy a

huge

success.

The Book :

Its

Visual Appearance

99

However, one whole section of the

public, merchants,

and humbler

groups who scarcely knew how to read, seem, for a long time afterwards, to have remained faithful to the old form of illustration. This public,

whose taste scarcely changed, was served by the poorer printers and the smaller publishers who for a long time stayed loyal to the old gothic types and, for an even longer time, to 1 5 th and early 1 6th-century
wood-cuts which they re-bought, used until they wore out and then had re-engraved without any modification. It was undoubtedly because of
the importance of this public that from around 1570 there was a noticeable renewal in the fashion for collections and series of popular

wood-cut

scenes.

It

was

a

period

when

the wood-cutters of the

Rue

Montorgueil brought out mass editions of the Stories of the that descendant of the Biblia pauperum with a large block on every Bible,
in Paris

page and
cartoon).

a

few simple
sale.

More

by way of caption (the ancestor of our strip were topical pictures of the Wars of Religion which had
lines

an immense

With them there began
in Paris

a

ture, the pedlar's stock-in-trade. In France, a small

new kind of popular literanumber of printers

and booksellers continued

Amadis

de Gaule,

and

Me'/usine,

and especially at Troyes to publish along with Scenes from the Bible and the

standard Shepherds' Calendars which hawkers sold in the country, small towns and even Paris right into the iyth and even i8th centuries. So widespread had this been that in the i9th century, when everyone could
read, chapmen's literature enjoyed an astonishing revival, and everywhere there reappeared texts which had been fashionable in the ijth century, and which Erasmus, Rabelais, La Fontaine and Voltaire had

not been able to replace.

By 1550

the

book

trade

was beginning to
:

feel the effect

of the

rise in

European economy the crisis which was to characterise the second half of the i6th century was under way. From that time on the illustrated book made little advance. The work of the engravers seems careless and hurried, and they tend more and more just to turn out poor copies of earlier illustrations. Fewer pictures were published and when publishing revived at the end of the century wood is no longer the medium, but copper. This was a change in technique which represented a new intellectual climate and we must consider its implications. Copperplate engraving was already well known since the 1 5th century and had been perfected (like printing) by goldsmiths. It allowed a more faithful rendering of light and shade, lines of greater subtlety were
prices affecting the

100

-

possible, and it had always been preferred by painters. From the end of the 1 5th century Italians like d' Andrea and Germans like Schongauer had brought the technique to perfection. 140 Attempts had also some-

made to apply the technique to printed books but they had not been too successful, because of a technical obstacle. In the case of wood-cuts it was possible both to place the cut and the typographic
times been
;

composition in the forme, to ink them in the same way and to print both text and illustration at the same time, but engraving meant separate printing of the copper plate, a costly and delicate matter if it was to
only wanted pictures which helped imagination, wood-cuts, however worn and lifeless, were preferred to copper engraving. But things were changing by about 1600. It must be remembered that the i6th century had been an age of
as the public
its

harmonise with type. For a long time, as long
efforts at

taste for painting had spread across Europe. Rich merchand Lyons, patrician families in Venice and Antwerp had their portraits done, and ordered from a growing number of painters canvasses no longer intended to decorate the walls of churches, but those of their own homes. At the same time, painters became engravers and

painters.

The

ants in Paris

less

wealthy people kept copper engravings as their 'poor man's picture

gallery'.

Mantegna

in Italy

and Diirer in Germany made

plates that

were

an immediate success and have remained famous. In France, copper engravers were most often originally goldsmiths and worked in isolation until the Italians, Primaticcio

chateau of Fontainebleau.
tion in France.

and II Rosso, came to decorate the school of copper engravers formed around Fontainebleau and their aim was to spread the new Italian style of decora-

A

wood-cut seemed coarse compared with Copper already seemed perfect for rendering architecture, classical monuments, or an exact likeness of the face. Soon, despite the technical difficulties, copper was increasingly used in book illustration. At first it was used only in exceptional cases to illustrate technical works or volumes studded with portraits, but gradually it extended to books of all kinds. 141 The decisive impetus came from Antwerp, a town with a great many painters, where Hieronymus Cock, a successful printseller, controlled a workshop in which the young Bruegel learnt the use of the burin. Plantin was in daily contact with Cock and his workers and began to have some of his books illustrated with copper plate engravings by the artists in
traditional

The

these copper engravings.

Cock's workshop.

He employed

the best copper engravers of the

Antwerp School,

The Book:
Pierre

Its

Visual Appearance

101

Van

der Borcht, the

Huys and

the brothers Wiericx. In 1566 he

published the Vivae imagines partium carports of Vesalius and Valverda illustrated with 42 plates, the Humanae salutis monumenta of Arias

Montanus
portraits

in 1571, and in 1574 the Icones veterum aliquot et novorum medicorum philosophorumque of Sambuca, in which there were 67 engraved

by Van der Borcht. These works spread through Europe and were much appreciated. Soon the consequences of Plantin's work were everywhere to be seen. In 1574, for example, Jean Thevet in Paris
published his Portraictsdeshommesillustres decorated with plates engraved in Flanders. Flemish printsellers and engravers flocked to Paris around
this

time and French publishers henceforth found more than enough

artists

142 ready to furnish what was required. From the end of the i6th century onwards the wood-cut declined and

almost disappeared as
literature. In fact
it

a

form of book

illustration, outside

of hawkers'
its

practically disappeared altogether.

Copper began

long reign of more than 200 years, and this was no merely technical change. The technique triumphed because of its powers of minutely accurate representation. As a means of communication conveying a

image and a permanent record it was unrivalled. The print became increasingly analogous in its diffusion of pictorial fact to the book in its diffusion of typographic fact. Thus the adoption of copper and the international trade in prints at the end of the i6th and beginning of the 1 7th centuries helped to widen men's horizons. We need only mention as an example the monumental collection of travels by Thomas de Bry in the early 1 7th century which imparted a sometimes erroneous but always precise idea of the world, from Lapland to Brazil, through
realistic

the

enormous work accomplished in one particular domain - mapmaking by the Dutch publishers of the i7th century.

medium of copper

engravings.

And we

should not forget the

Books of engravings became collectors' pieces, and, increasingly, merchants and even humbler people, too poor to possess paintings,
adorned the walls of their houses with prints: no longer crude wood-cuts, but copper engravings which depicted, faithfully and in detail - and
therefore with a greater appearance of reality

-

religious or historical

subjects or different aspects of everyday life. If there was a call to commemorate an important event

which had

captured the imagination, a victorious battle for example, the coronation of a king, or fetes, ballets and spectacles given by a prince if one wished
;

to

know the likeness of a great man

;

if a

man of letters or a rich merchant

wished to circulate his portrait to friends or correspondents
to preserve the

;

if one

wished

was there to
reproduced.

memory of a picturesque scene in the street - the engraver do it. Much more so than the painter, since prints could be

He was the photographer of his day. Thus Callot made everyone the principal episodes of the siege of Breda or of La Rochelle he conveyed the vitality of the fairground, the horrors of
known
to
;

war, or the roaming life of Bohemians, and even engraved for theatre lovers portraits of the characters of the Comedie Italienne. Abraham

Bosse provided a precise portrayal of the life of the Parisian bourgeoisie, and Nanteuil and his competitors produced numerous portraits of
princes and of merchants in the second half of the iyth century. In the 1 8th century the engravers of the French school set out to portray manners and morals, illustrating the daily life of the aristocracy and the

bourgeoisie, and the street-life of Paris.

The print also played its critical part in the diffusion of works of art. From the iyth century, thanks to the engraving, most people were
acquainted with the masterpieces of art scattered throughout Europe. A host of engravers from every country devoted themselves to reproducing the paintings, monuments, and ruins of Italy. Engravers were
often also<:ommissioned to reproduce the paintings of the great masters of their native country in their own day. Nanteuil and Morin, for example, produced prints after the portraits of Philippe de Champaigne

and

that portrait painter

owed much
this

of his contemporary fame to
established an atelier for

them. 143 Rubens was well aware of the value of having his works made

more widely known through

medium and

engravers to turn out prints of his pictures. Henceforth, living in the neighbourhood of the shops of the big printsellers like Mariette of

reproduced the works of the great Italian, Flemish, French or German masters. Everyone could examine them and compare them at their leisure. From then on, it was engravers who made known
Paris, engravers

and diffused ornamental

styles.

The engraving was thus an
some of its
interest.

essential

medium

of information in the

i

yth

century. In the midst of these transformations, the illustrated

book

lost

Forced

as they

costs, publishers confined illustrations to a

were by economic difficulties to cut few plates which could be

separated from the text, or to a frontispiece, to avoid the extra expense of double imposition necessary to secure an impression from a copper

engraving and letterpress on the same page. Engravers charged high

The Book:
prices for their
sales, like

Its

Visual Appearance

103

work, and only exceptional luxury works with assured

Chapelain's La Pucelle, a big favourite impatiently awaited by the literary world, would merit adequate illustration. In such cases there was no hesitation in asking even the greatest painters to furnish designs for engravers. Rubens, Vignon, Poussin, Philippe de Champaigne and

Le Brun collaborated

in this

way

in

book

illustration.

With them the

divorce between text and image became so marked that by the end of the iyth century it was enough to call a book 'illustrated' if a picture of the

author was inside. In the
illustrators.

classical

period there were very few

real

book

In the

1

8th century circumstances were different again. 144

conditions evolved further, publishers were once

Economic more concerned about

the quality of their products and vignettes reappeared in the midst of printed pages. Once more, there was a public keenly interested in illustrated books.

But times had changed since the ijth and i6th centuries

when illustrated books had been destined for a vast public. The new 1 8th century demand was in the luxury market and came from the aristocracy
of wealth, bankers and financiers who, proud of their recently acquired fortunes, wished to start a library of their own. Having no inclination for
serious works which bored them, they turned bibliophiles with a taste for sumptuously decorated books. It was an age when rich tax farmers had magnificently illustrated editions made of the Fables and Contes of

La Fontaine, when the most celebrated illustrated book was of the insipid

more indicative still, the Temple of Cnidus, a aberration of youthful Montesquieu's. In France at least, there was a renaissance of the illustrated book. Boucher and Fragonard dazzling
Chansons of Laborde, or

entrusted their

But the

illustrated

work to the excellent engravers of the French school. book represented only an insignificant proportion

of printed output and reached only a small part of the public, one comparable to the contemporary market for bibliophile productions and limited editions of art books. At this period, therefore, the illustrated

book would be of small interest to this study had it not been for the great technical skill applied by engravers to the scientific and technical works of the period in providing illustrations essential to the comprehension
of the
text.

In the age of the 'philosophies' these books were numerous

and of particular importance. Buffon's work, and of course the huge enterprise of the Encyclopedic, could not have been conceived without the
aid of detailed

many

and precise copper engraving which brought to life the technical articles. Nor could the accounts of explorations, which

104

became increasingly numerous which were accompanied by made on the expeditions.

in the time of

Cook and La Perouse and
reproducing sketches

prints, faithfully

5

Clothing the

Book The Binding
:

When we

examine the old bindings preserved, often
:

in pristine condi-

tion, on manuscripts and books printed in any period up to the i9th century one thing strikes us right away the bindings which cover even quite ordinary books are strong and infinitely better in quality than those which do service today. To take an actual example - the books in the old Bibliotheque Royale, now the Bibliotheque Nationale, were bound in the iyth century with red morocco using gold tooling, and emblazoned with the royal arms. Today most books received by the Bibliotheque Nationale are only bound in cloth. There is no reason to be surprised by this care for solidity, and the quality of materials used in binding, which arouses admiration in the trade today. At that time a manuscript or its successor, a printed book, was so comparatively rare and costly an item of merchandise that it merited care in its preservation and adornment. From the invention of

printing right up to the 1 8th century, although the readership increased, the book was still the preserve of a small and favoured elite. In days when paper was made by hand and books printed on hand presses, the book

was

still

seen as a precious object, which

it

was important to preserve,

and therefore had to be bound carefully. What were the distinctive features of bindings between the 1 5 th and 1 8th centuries? That is, commercial bindings: it is not our intention
to discuss luxury bindings, art objects destined for a small circle of did binders, between the ijth and i8th princes and bibliophiles.

How

centuries, adapt their technique to

cope with growing numbers of books ?

did increased output have on the quality and the of appearance bindings? These are the main questions we want to

What consequences

answer here.
Again, the coming of printing produced no sudden revolutionary upheaval. The same craftsmen who bound manuscripts applied their skill in t^ie same way to books. They continued to cover the back and the
boards,

made of

solid

wood, with precious

fabrics like velvet, silk,

The Book:
cloth of gold,

Its

Visual Appearance

loj

if binding luxury editions destined for important people. Otherwise they used leather - tanned calf, sheepskin, and in Germany also pigskin. Then with their finishing tools they impressed designs often

in repeated patterns

made with fillets or roulettes, sometimes

'blind'

(i.e.

without gold

leaf)

and sometimes

'tooled' (with gold leaf). Styles varied

fleurs de lys, eagles

from area to area and subjects and motifs were of infinite variety: with one or two heads, animals of all kinds, real or imaginary, lions and griffins, dragons and greyhounds, coats of arms, the four evangelists, streamers and inscriptions, sometimes just the simple

monograph IHS,
head of Christ.
There
is
'

the pascal lamb, a picture of a saint, the cross, or the

appearance between the manuscript and the first incunabuk up to about early ijth century the year 1480. They continued to be bound in heavy, solid bindings with metal clasps, their covers studded with nails for protection (books
in

no immediate change

books of the

were stored

flat

or kept on desks).

Many were bound

in monasteries, in

binding workshops, were the products of private workshops, whose binders worked in liaison with copyists serving the secular market, in particular the stationers near the universities.

situated in the proximity of the copyists. Others

From around 1480

printed book multiplied and

the consequences of printing began to be felt. The its use became more common. Private

individuals developed libraries of their own and books ceased to be a purely monastic possession. Monastic binderies diminished in import-

ance while the private binders grew more affluent, especially in university towns where they were assured of finding a clientele. Most often they
set

up near stationers, or were stationers themselves as well as publishers.

Big publishers like the Kobergers owned binderies equipped to carry out mass production. But it must be stressed that books were not bound
as part of the normal publishing process as they are now. Only a few copies of a work could expect to be sold in any one town, and many printers had agents in all parts of Europe selling books for them. Since

binding was heavy and expensive and transport costs were high, books were sent in unbound sheets from one town to the next in
barrels.

A

few were bound

that only a small

number of copies were bound

edition being stored in have it bound to his taste later.

were bought, but inventories show in the shop, most of the sheets since the buyer preferred to buy it thus and
as they

Unaware of this

situation, historians

of

binding have

until recently

tended to assume that books were generally

io6

bound

in the

towns where they had been printed.

the press began to turn out many more books, binders had to adapt their methods to respond to new demands. Work had to be done more rapidly, and serial production was necessary to

When, however,

make bindings of
and
less

suitable but less

ponderous quality to

satisfy a larger

wealthy

trade and this

encouraged the growth of the paper increased the number of waste sheets; so began the habit
clientele. Printing
It

of using 'cardboard' for covers in place of wooden boards.

was cheaper

and not

as

heavy,

made by

ened them. Paper of all

pasting several sheets together which toughkinds was used - old proof sheets, old books used
files,

as scrap, letters, business

archives.

The dismantling of old bindings

often brings interesting finds to light.

The decoration of covers,
cost.

too,

had to be done more quickly and

at less

By using ornamental plates instead of decorating the whole surface with tiny fillets repeated over and over again, which was laborious
time.

and demanded great care, they achieved an impressive effect and saved A whole scene could be impressed at once on to the cover with the

example, these plates reproduced scenes from the Old and New Testament, preferably those which figured in the Book of Hours or the images of saints. Most of the subjects chosen had a pious intention, even if the content of the book was not religious. Otherwise,
iron. In France, for

plates were used to impress personal devices of booksellers, or, lastly, for pure decoration. 147 In Flanders, the plates showed a taste for animals

and miniatures, and in the Germanic countries, somewhat later, allegorical and mythological subjects inspired by the Renaissance were
often used.

In the

first

years of the i6th century, there

was another change.

Confronted by the incessant increase of books, binders, always on the lookout for a more rapid method which would economise labour and
reduce the cost of their products, developed a different technique, that of the roulette. The roulette was a tiny metal wheel, on which was
a simple, repeatable motif. By this means it became possible to decorate bindings with a series of rapidly executed headbands. Sometimes the plate system and the roulette system were used simul-

engraved

taneously. This

meant

that the centrepiece of a cover could be decorated

with a figure and the surrounds run off with the roulette. Such was the appearance of commercial bindings in the first third of the 1 6th century. Meanwhile, new processes were introduced into the

The Book:

Its

Visual Appearance

107

making of luxury bindings. Copies made for princes had traditionally been bound in cloth, because skins could not be prepared finely enough for the purpose so long as only the 'cold' process of stamping was
situation changed, however, when morocco leather and the of technique gold tooling were introduced into Europe from the Islamic world. From the close of the 1 5th century morocco from Cordova was

known. The

imported into Naples via the Balearics, and Levant morocco came to Venice via Constantinople. From about that time, Aldus used it in
Venice but
tury.
148
it

was not used

in

France until the middle of the i6th cen-

Meanwhile, gold tooling, which had long been known in the East, was also adopted by the Italians. It was in use at Naples in 1475 to decorate bindings for King Ferdinand of Aragon, by applying heated
irons to thin gold or silver
this
leaf. By 1500 the Venetians were following example. Aldus, who had just founded a workshop specialising in Greek typography, did more than anyone to promote the fashion for

when

gold tooling in Eastern motifs which spread to Northern Italy, so that the French invaded Italy they too developed a taste for gorgeous decoration. The Kings of France, and also the famous Grolier, who was

treasurer of Milan,

brought the

had work carried out for them in Italian binderies and new technique to France. In the second third of the i6th

century, French artists surpassed their Italian masters, using polychrome mosaics, interlacings and fleurons painted with resins, or, for more

sombre bindings, pure geometric designs

in Renaissance style.

These

bindings are unequalled in the perfection of their technique, but we shall not discuss them further since they were confined to Kings and to a small

number of very rich bibliophiles. At the same time, the semi-luxury binding appeared,

the technique of

hot-stamping being applied to commercial bindings. From 1520 it was used for plate work as in Geoffrey Tory's famous 'pot casse' or broken
urn. Plates decorated with
filets

and interlacing were sometimes used to

make more economical bindings in imitation of the roulette method. Sometimes a motif -the mark of a bookseller or the bust of a character is

placed in the centre. Finally, until the end of the i6th century, par-

books, an oval-shaped central motif was impressed with a die stamp. But all such methods were costly and time consuming and gradually simple calf bindings appear without decoration. When
ticularly in religious

worsening economic conditions led to a demand for the lowest possible prices less valuable books began to be bound in vellum and even prelates
like Cardinal Charles

de Bourbon were satisfied with bindings of morocco
fillets.' 49

decorated only with borders of gold

During the zyth and i8th centuries calf binding was the norm, with a Morocco was used for more elegant books. When books belonged to a great nobleman or private collector he would often have his arms struck on the centre of the covers. Bibliophiles however continued to have gold decorated bindings 'au petit fer' made in
plain gold-filleted border.

the zyth century. Then, when bibliophile tastes developed in the i8th century, luxury binding in France received a new impulse: mosaic designs were made for Philippe d'Orleans the Regent and his court

around 1720; decorated polychrome bindings inspired by Chinese art came into fashion, and especially popular were bindings 'a la dentelle',
frame decorated
the surrounds of the plates being gilded by the application of a hot iron in a lacework motif. This was the age when Pasdeloup,

Monnier and Derome worked on

illustrated luxury orders, vied for

by the public. But, once again, these bindings, like the books they covered, were destined for a small and privileged market. The average mass-produced binding was a perfunctory product. From the end of the
iyth century, simple marbled paper was sometimes used for small books and for the increasing number of journals. So if we compare bindings on ordinary books from the i5th to the 1 8th centuries we find that when the clientele was small (in the 1 5th and
early i6th centuries) binders
still

decorated even 'trade' books. But as in

the course of the i6th century book production increased, editions proliferated and the book reached a larger public, binders sought tech-

niques which would enable them to bind suitably decorated books more rapidly. Soon they had to stop decorating the covers of commercial
bindings. While the art of luxury binding enjoyed a boom in the middle of the i6th century and then again in the 1 8th century, the average book,

although durably bound, no longer had any cover decoration. Since

books were now stored upright and pushed up closely against one another to save space, only the spine which was to be seen on the shelves of libraries bore any tooling: usually some decorative motifs and a
stamped
1

title. With the steam press and papermaking machinery of the 9th century, books were printed more cheaply and quickly in larger editions, and binding was often abandoned in favour of a simple stitched

cover. In a word, with the
its

growth

in

production of books and the
first

increase in the reading public, the average binding gradually shed

beauty and then

its solidity.

