A History of Reading
steven roger fischer

reaktion books

To Joan Seaver Kurze

Published by Reaktion Books Ltd 79 Farringdon Road, London ec1m 3ju, uk www.reaktionbooks.co.uk First published 2003 First published in paperback 2004 Copyright © Steven Roger Fischer 2003 All rights reserved No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publishers. Printed and bound in Great Britain by Biddles Ltd, King's Lynn British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data Fischer, Steven R. A history of reading. ­ (Globalities) 1. Reading ­ History 2. Books and reading ­ History I. Title 418.4'09 isbn 1 86189 160 1 (hbk) isbn 1 86189 209 8 (pbk)

Contents

p r e fac e 7

1 2 3 4 5 6 7

The Immortal Witness 11 The Papyrus Tongue 45 A World of Reading 99 The Parchment Eye 141 The Printed Page 205 The `Universal Conscience' 253 Reading the Future 307
r e f e r e n c e s 347 s e l e c t b i b l i o g r a p h y 365 i l l u s t r at i o n a c k n ow l e d g e m e n t s 373 i n d e x 374

Amenhotep-Son-of-Hapu, an eminent Egyptian scribe, reading a partially opened papyrus scroll. The statue dates from the 14th century bc.

one

The Immortal Witness

Be a scribe! Engrave this in your heart So that your name might live on like theirs! The scroll is better than the carved stone. A man has died: his corpse is dust, And his people have passed from the land. It is a book which makes him remembered In the mouth of the speaker who reads him.1

`In the mouth of the speaker who reads him', intoned the Egyptian scribe who, about 1300 BC, appreciated that `to read' meant `to recite'. For most of written history, reading was speaking. People had earlier realized that verbal instructions, agreements and tallies could easily be garbled, disputed or forgotten. A special witness had been needed, an `immortal witness', who could recall aloud amounts and commodities without error, who could be questioned at any time to confirm facts verbally and stop disputes. And so writing was born, at first blush the human voice turned to stone. When city-states expanded into kingdoms, demands on writing increased exponentially, necessitating ever more complex forms of written documentation ­ each time intended to be read aloud. Reading has always been different from writing. Writing prioritizes sound, as the spoken word must be transformed or deconstructed into representative sign(s). Reading, however, prioritizes meaning.2 The faculty of reading has, in fact, very little to do with the skill of writing. What is reading, then? The answer is not simple, as the act of reading is variable, not absolute. In its most general modern definition, reading is of course the ability to make sense of written or printed symbols. The reader `uses the symbols to guide the recovery of information from his or her memory and
11

subsequently uses this information to construct a plausible interpretation of the writer's message'.3 But reading has not always been this. Initially it was the simple faculty of extracting visual information from any encoded system and comprehending the respective meaning. Later it came to signify almost exclusively the comprehending of a continuous text of written signs on an inscribed surface. More recently it has included the extracting of encoded information from an electronic screen. And reading's definition will doubtless continue to expand in future for, as with any faculty, it is also a measure of humanity's own advancement. Just like our five senses, reading involves something wonderfully unique, as the following paradox will illustrate.4 Jones has taught himself to read Greek letters, but hasn't learnt Greek yet. Andropolis grew up speaking Greek, but has never learnt Greek letters. One day Andropolis gets a letter from Greece, and has Jones read it to him. Jones can voice the letters, but cannot understand; Andropolis can understand, but cannot voice the letters. Who, then, is actually reading? The answer: both together. Reading is not merely the attaching of sound to grapheme, which occurs only at an elementary level. Meaning is involved, and in a fundamental way. At a higher level of perception reading can even convey meaning alone, without any recourse to sound. Therein lies reading's sense-like magic. The multiple processes of reading, as the eminent British linguist Roy Harris has affirmed, `must inevitably be relative to particular cultural purposes, and depend on the contrasting modes of oral rendition which a particular culture may have institutionalized'.5 Hence, what we judge to be `reading' in the past is usually an arbitrary comparison based on what reading means to us today. Such a retrospective judgement is invalid, because throughout history reading has been many different things to many peoples. Its origins are ancient. Reading appears to be superficially and parasitically coupled to such primeval cognitive scanning processes as tracking, weaving, tool-making, berry gathering, face and gender recognition and many others, whereby a flood of visual data ­ shapes, units, patterns, orientation, sequencing ­ is assessed at a glance.
12 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

Specialists in communications recognize five phases of information exchange: production, transmission, reception, storage and repetition. When writing is present in a society, these five occur either aurally (one is read to), as in spoken discourse, or visually, incorporating the sense of sight (or, with the blind, touch). Reading is frequently a synæsthetic process: that is, it often combines the two senses of hearing and sight. However, most significantly, hearing is habitually bypassed, leaving reading reliant only on sight (or touch). Consequently, two conflicting theories of reading obtain. The first, supported by those who believe reading to be an exclusively linguistic process, sees reading as a phonological (relating to the sound system of a language) linear process that occurs letter by letter, linking language's elements into ever larger comprehensible units, until first utterance and then understanding are achieved. The second theory, endorsed by those who hold reading to be a visual semantic process, maintains that the grapheme or graphic form ­ whether logogram (word sign), syllabogram (syllabic sign) or a combination of letters (signs in an alphabetic system) ­ yields meaning without necessary recourse to language. Whole words and phrases, even short sentences, can be read `at one go', the proponents of this theory maintain; one doesn't have to deconstruct them into individually sounded-out letters. Yet both theories are correct, in that each obtains at a different level of reading competence and/or activity. That is, elementary reading is indeed a phonological linear process, whereas fluent reading is a visual semantic process. Others have argued that early historical reading in particular was `a matter of hearing the cuneiform, that is, hallucinating the speech from looking at its picture-symbols, rather than visual reading of syllables in our sense.'6 This theory of `aural hallucinating', however, defies both laboratory evidence and the known history of writing: both `ear' and `eye' demand equal acknowledgement in any responsible theory of early reading. This is because the act is in reality a highly complex, multi-level, cerebral process requiring fundamentals and higher-order units simultaneously. Learning to read appears to be a separate activity from fluent reading, to be sure. But as fluent reading frequently
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 13

requires recourse to learning stratagems ­ when reading an unfamiliar or foreign word, or a different hand, type, script or even entire writing system ­ so, too, does learning to read require recourse to advanced visual stratagems in turn, in order to internalize patterns. In this way, two different types of reading have apparently always obtained: literal or mediate reading (learning), and visual or immediate reading (fluent). Everyone begins with mediate reading, putting sound to sign. Most learners then progress to immediate reading, putting sense to sign directly, then advance to larger sign groupings (phrases or even short sentences). After several exposures to a word or sign-combination, a reader comes to form a direct pathway between sign and sense, bypassing sound altogether. Only this explains most of what we find with fluent adult reading. Frequent readers always become fluent readers, who then minimize sound and maximize sense. For want of longer texts and a reading audience, reading as we know it today did not exist before classical antiquity. The earliest readers sighted the notched stick or the dictated tally, the oral made visible. Very few people had cause to learn to read: only those who wished to verify an account, check a label or identify an owner's mark. In time, scribe-reciters intoned dockets, letters, legal documents, pæans and dedications. Antiquity's great clay and papyrus archives eventually appeared, though first and foremost to oversee and authenticate accounts and contracts and to prompt the memory of those who recalled the greater oral story. During its first three millennia, the `immortal witness' was the spoken word incarnate.

the first readers
The further one looks back into the past, the more difficult reading becomes.7 Primitive recording systems comprised codes known only to a small group of practitioners. For the most part, ancient `literature' conveyed only what could be learnt by heart. Reading and writing did not exist as
14 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

autonomous domains of activity. They were minimal appendages to speech. Ambiguity abounded. Decoding of mnemonics (memory aids) and graphics (pictorial displays) can also be regarded as `reading', albeit in a primitive sense.8 Both Neandertals and early Homo sapiens sapiens read notches on bones signalling something that was meaningful to them ­ perhaps a tally of game, days or lunar cycles. Cave art was `read', too, as graphic stories bearing meaningful information. Primitive tribes read lengthy picture messages on bark or leather that could convey great detail. In many earlier societies tally sticks were read to learn amounts. Signalling allowed symbolic messages to be read over a distance: flags, smoke, fired powders, reflections from polished metals and other devices. The Incas read the colour-coded quipus knots to keep track of complicated mercantile transactions. Ancient Polynesians read string and notch records in order to chant their generations. All such `readings' involved predetermined codes. They conveyed a known significance ­ whether an action (as in cave art), numerical value (as in tallies and knots) or spoken name (as in notches and strings) ­ without fulfilling, however, the criteria for complete writing. In its most general sense, writing is the `sequencing of standardized symbols (characters, signs or sign components) in order to graphically reproduce human speech, thought and other things in part or whole.'9 Because this is a limiting definition of something that defies limitation, the wonder of writing, it might be preferable to use `complete writing' instead as a working model, understanding this to comprise the fulfilment of three specific criteria:
· Complete writing must have as its purpose communication; · Complete writing must consist of artificial graphic marks on a durable or electronic surface; · Complete writing must use marks that relate conventionally to articulate speech (the systematic arrangement of significant vocal sounds) or electronic programming in such a way that communication is achieved.

t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 15

Complete writing was a long time coming. For thousands of years, people used indexical symbols to record quantities: five pebbles for five sheep, for example, with each pebble `read' as one sheep. As early as ten thousand years ago, the Azilian people of France were painting crosses, stripes and other designs on pebbles to be read as a code for something, the meaning now lost. Small clay tokens or counters of various geometrical shapes, bearing lines, crosses, circles and other designs, were read for some eight thousand years in the Middle East in a rudimentary bookkeeping system, each token representing one of the given commodity, its design identifying its kind. In time, such chit-like counters in Mesopotamia were being enclosed in special clay `envelopes' called bullæ, the outside of which bore the same token design to identify, at a glance, commodity; it also held a sequence of dots or lines to signal amount. Eventually, clay tablets conveyed similar bookkeeping, also using readily identifiable graphic symbols to represent these and other things. Over time, the pictograms became standardized and abstract, but retained their phonetic value. A paradigm shift occurred when Sumerian scribes began using systemic phoneticism: that is, they systematically coordinated sounds and symbols (including pictograms) to create `signs' of a writing system. A design no longer signified a real commodity, like a sheep, but stood for a specific sound value instead. It was Sumer's conscious exploitation of the phonographic in the pictographic that turned incomplete writing into complete writing. Reading in its true form emerged when one started to interpret a sign for its sound value alone within a standardized system of limited signs. Whole texts, and not just isolated words, could now be conveyed, meaning that reading was no longer a one-to-one transfer (object to word), but a logical sequencing of sounds to recreate a natural human language. Rather than reading pictures, one now read language. The three criteria for complete writing were now fulfilled. Sign became sound ­ freed from its system-external referent ­ in Mesopotamia between 6,000 and 5,700 years ago. The idea soon spread, west to the Nile and east to the Iranian Plateau and even to the Indus, where different languages and different social
16 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

needs demanded other graphic expressions. Everywhere, writing was recognized to be an invaluable tool for accumulating and storing information: it facilitated accounting, material storage and transport, and it retained names, dates and places better than human memory ever could. All early `reading' involved very simple code recognition, and was invariably task-orientated.

mesopotamia
Reading long remained a very primitive tool in Mesopotamia. The world's first active readers sighted only a bare skeleton of text (name, commodity, amount), the control of which served to empower an oligarchy. Sumerian writing developed `not to reproduce a pre-existent spoken discourse but to commit to memory concrete bits of information'.10 This soon led to classifying reality in useful lists made up of nouns (proper names and commodities), adjectives (qualities), verbs (actions) and numbers arranged in easily comprehensible columns, themselves bearing meaning through their orientation. `Reading' entailed logically putting together bits of connected information, not reconstituting articulate speech. Though the very earliest readings were perhaps of incomplete writing, these were none the less `complete readings'. For unlike writing, reading is not bound to language: reading is foremost visual (not oral) and conceptual (not linguistic). Whereas Egypt codified its hieroglyphic and hieratic signs early on, and so fossilized its writing system, for many centuries Sumer maintained a loose and ambiguous inventory of about eighteen hundred pictograms and symbols.11 Simplification and conventionalization occurred, and by 2700­2350 bc, with the tablets of Shuruppak, the inventory had been reduced to about eight hundred, with greater use of linearity (writing in lines of text). By roughly 2500 bc nearly all the graphic elements in Sumer's writing system had become sound units. And by 2000 bc only about 570 logograms were in everyday use.12 Wedges had replaced the earlier pictograms, now impressed by a reed stylus (a pointed writing instrument) into soft clay. The wedges became stylized, eventually losing identifiability. Most
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 17

Mesopotamian reading occurred in this cuneiform or wedgeshaped writing in clay, though cuneiforms were also carved in stone and inscribed on wax, ivory, metal and even glass. Very seldom, however, was cuneiform written in ink on papyrus, as scribes customarily wrote in Egypt. Mesopotamians read, then, foremost a `literature of clay'. Because of this, the physical act of reading was frequently problematical: to remain wieldy, clay tablets had to be palm-sized, obliging miniature texts. `To read' was Sumerian s ita (s it, s id, s ed), meaning also `to count, calculate, consider, memorize, recite, read aloud'. Very few in Mesopotamia could ever achieve this faculty. Around 2000 bc at Ur, the region's greatest metropolis with a population of around 12,000, only a small proportion ­ perhaps one out of a hundred, or about 120 people at most ­ could read and write. From 1850 to 1550 bc the Babylonian city-state of Sippar, with approximately 10,000 inhabitants, housed only 185 named `scribes' (that is, official tablet writers), ten of whom were in fact women.13 It appears from this and similar statistics elsewhere that no more than at most a few score literates were alive in Mesopotamia's city-states at any given time. Unless it was one of those rare, palm-sized, literary editions with its miniature text, a clay tablet was a large and ponderous thing, quite ill suited to leisurely reading. From this near-universal failure of Mesopotamian scribes to elaborate a more user-friendly literature, one can deduce that reading was predominantly work. That is, it was not a solitary, agreeable, silent business ­ but public, taxing and loud. The written word very often served simply to prompt the retrieval of a text earlier learnt by heart. For all Mesopotamian literature, even written literature, was public and oral. Writing was still a means to an end, the public performance, a tradition stretching back tens of thousands of years, and not yet an end in itself: the solitary confrontation with the written word. Tablets `spoke' for those whose seals were impressed on them. Judges in Babylon, for example, could speak of a tablet's contents as its `mouth', could publicly assert they had `heard' the tablet (in a way very similar to how today's judges regard affidavits).14 There was no contesting, no challenge by witnesses in attendance; denying one's seal brought severe
18 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

punishment. The written voice was the actual voice. For oral and written literature were one. By around 2500 bc then, or some three hundred years after the East Semitic Akkadians had invaded Sumer and risen to prominence, cuneiform script was complete and capable of conveying any and every thought in the Sumerian language, which the Akkadians continued to use (much as later Europeans preserved classical Greek and Latin). Essential in this process was the establishment, by convention, of a syllabary. This is an inventory of systematic signs used purely for their syllabic sound values: ti, mu, sa and so forth.15 In this learnable system the Sumero-Akkadian reader-reciter then declaimed the treasury of his, and also her, `native' literature. The entire Babylonian tradition is conveyed in these two languages: Sumerian and Akkadian. Many texts comprise lexical and grammatical compilations, displaying how involved the society was in fusing the two traditions in order to preserve the ancient legacy and to ensure continued understanding of ancient texts. Written until about ad 100, in its closing centuries Akkadian was mainly used as a literary, not a spoken, language. (As a spoken tongue, it competed with, and merged into, Babylonian and Assyrian, considered by some scholars to be linguistically distinct stages of evolved Akkadian.) The great Assyrian Empire, which, between 721 and 633 bc, stretched from Egypt to the Persian Gulf, used Sumero-Akkadian cuneiform writing to perpetuate the same traditions, which neighbours borrowed and adapted. Between approximately 550 and 350 bc Old Persian scribes used cuneiform writing, too, but in order to convey their IndoEuropean language with some 40 signs of both syllabic (ka) and phonemic (/k/) values.16 The Old Persian script is found in a small number of royal inscriptions, the longest and most important of these being the trilingual monument of Darius I (c. 550­486 bc) at Bisitun, western Iran:
Says Darius the king: If you look at this inscription or these sculptures, (and) do not destroy them (but), as long as there is strength to you, you care for them, may Ahuramazda ¯ be 17 friendly to you.
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 19

From the beginning, the physical form of reading material had been dictated by immediate purpose. The length of an early Mesopotamian text depended on a clay tablet's size, format, dimensions and `cartouches' (oblong figures enclosing significant units, like names). Early tablet compartments yielded later to horizontal lines, with writing on both sides of the tablet. The first literature (not accounting records) comprised square or oblong clay tablets around one finger-length in size, designed to fit comfortably in the reader's palm. A `book' comprised several of these, possibly stored in a wooden box or leather pouch in a given order for sequential retrieval. Public proclamations, laws and aggrandizing propaganda, such as royal funerary inscriptions, were often stone or clay texts of grandiose proportions, many to be consulted for reference (much as we use a public or corporate library today). In the twelfth century bc at Assur on the Tigris, for example, the Middle Assyrian Code of Laws, inscribed in columns on both sides, loomed in stone over six square metres in size, its public prominence bespeaking authority, its text more feared than read.18 Who did read, then? Scribes, mostly. However, school tablets have emerged out of the ruins of most of the wealthier residences of Ur. Apparently an ability to read penetrated to the Mesopotamian domestic domain as well, though it is unclear exactly to what extent this obtained.19 It is possible that the ability to read and write, already in the third millennium bc, was one of the distinguishing qualities of the aristocracy. Perhaps this ability helped to define the aristocracy as a distinct class. If so, then reading and writing would have experienced wide emulation. A Sumerian scribe doubtless possessed a great sense of responsibility for this highly valued faculty, knowing it was his or her interpretation of a written text that publicly settled a dispute over accounts or an article of law. The goddess of scribes, Nisaba, had as her symbol the stylus, as it was the act of recording that embodied the scribe's primary role, not the act of reading-reciting. This tells us that a scribe was foremost the notary public of his and her era, the notarial stenographer of most of society's important activities, the executive secretary, the governmental bureaucrat.
20 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

Of course reading as we know it today played no role in this vital business of state. From grain shipments to temple tributes, from simple messages to lengthy accolades, the everyday complexity of town life was enabled by these reciting scribes ­ and everywhere oral communication took precedence. The written word was still not a voice that existed for itself. (This phenomenon emerged in the fourth century bc, in Greece; see Chapter 2.) For thousands of years, reading was a medium; it was not yet a channel. It is for this reason that we hear the author's precise instructions to the scribe in most Mesopotamian letters: `To My Lord, say this: thus speaks So-and-so, your servant'.20 The scribe could not separate, as we do today, oral instruction from oral message. Scribal duty actually forbade such separation ... as it protected the scribe from potential litigation. But scribes were not exclusively notaries, stenographers, accountants, archivists, secretaries and bureaucrats. They were also active readers whose non-literate superiors or patrons ­ whether architect, astronomer, merchant or priest ­ regularly bade them read aloud, either out of duty or for a small fee. If hyperopic (far-sighted, as most men over 45 tend to be), the scribe could use a pair of hollow reeds, held in one hand, to help focus his eyes to make out the often excruciatingly tiny cuneiforms on the small tablet cradled in the palm of the other hand. A clear drinking glass filled with water might have helped also, the small tablet positioned behind it to magnify the minute wedges. Reading these scribes' ancient correspondence today, in translation, opens up to us an exotic and inscrutable world, one surprisingly filled, though, with familiar human emotions and weaknesses. Like the merchant Nanni's dictated letter to his business associate Ea-nasir in Ur around 1700 bc:
You did not do what you promised me. You put ingots that were not good before my messenger and said: `If you want to take them, take them; if you don't want them go away!' What do you take me for, that you treat somebody like me in such a fashion? I have sent as messengers gentlemen like ourselves to reclaim my money, but you have treated me with contempt by sending them back to me empty handed several times. . .
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 21

Take notice that from now on I will no longer accept any copper from you that is not of fine quality. I shall henceforth select the ingots individually in my own yard, and I shall exercise my right of rejection because you have treated me with contempt.21

To become a professional scribe in Babylon in 1700 bc, boys had to attend, from age six to 18, scribal school from early morning to late afternoon for 24 days in every 30.22 Here they learnt to read and write defunct Sumerian and their native Akkadian, as well as history, mathematics, religious literature and the preparation of legal contracts, one of the principal activities of their chosen profession.23 Though reading and writing formed a large part of the curriculum, much of the material remained oral, neither written down nor read. Indeed, the vast majority of Babylon's social knowledge was transmitted orally and was never committed to clay. From unearthed tablets it has been possible to reconstruct the scribal schools' method of teaching reading. Reading was learnt through the act of writing. First the teacher covered one side of a small tablet with a sign, whereupon the pupil wrote the same sign over and over again on the reverse. Then two signs were paired to form a complete word, which the pupil similarly reproduced. In an Akkadian school, for example, the word ana (`to') was split into two separate syllables using the signs a and na. (The writing system, a syllabography, allowed only this conventional pairing; that is, there existed no separate signs for ana or an-.) In the third stage the pupil studied a proverb, short sentence or list of names, then reversed the tablet and reproduced this, too. In reversing the tablet, the pupil was being forced to visualize the text in order to rewrite it. Above all else, visualization, transcending mechanical imitation, enabled the pupil to become an independent reader and writer ­ it etched the signs and their permissible combinations into memory. Yet one had to have a visual inventory not only of individual signs, but also of whole words, names, phrases, even complete sentences. (This was indeed a form of the same `whole-word' method of learning to read that was rediscovered by Western educationalists in the eighteenth century ad.)
22 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

Once a professional, the scribe could look forward to a life of mostly documenting transactions. In particular this entailed financial exchanges, which required exact transcription of the oral agreement and the official witnessing (the `notarization') by the scribe himself or herself. Other successful graduates became bookkeepers and accountants for merchants, shippers or royal temples (where visitors often received receipts for their offerings). Especially gifted graduates, those commanding difficult mathematics, became highly respected surveyors. Drop-outs and failures could still become respectable letter-writers and letterreaders, who were always in demand under their awnings in nearly every town and village market. Unlike today, scribes were seldom their society's creative writers: all creative literature remained oral. Such orally composed works were, however, sometimes preserved on clay by a scribe, on command or request. Nearly all Mesopotamian pupils were boys, the ones expected to assume the family responsibilities or allowed to become professional scribes. However, there were rare exceptions (as with Sippar above). Significantly, the first author in history who signed a work was a woman: Princess Enheduanna, daughter of King Sargon I of Akkad. Born c. 2300 bc, she composed, as High Priestess of Nanna, god of the moon, a series of songs in praise of the goddess of love and war, Inanna, duly recording her own name as author-scribe at the end of her tablets.24 This, however, was something exceptional. In ancient Mesopotamia it was customary for a scribe to record in a colophon ­ a closing inscription giving peripheral information ­ his (sometimes her) name, location and date of writing, as this officially verified the oral transmission. For readers were not yet `reading a text', but still hearing the voice of a scribal colleague who needed identification. Most Mesopotamian colophons end with the maxim `Let the tutored instruct the tutored, for the untutored may not see',25 meaning that as only few command reading and writing, their social responsibility is profound and should not be forgotten or taken lightly. Rare archæological discoveries of ancient archives provide perhaps the best evidence of what people were then reading in Mesopotamia.26 During excavations conducted from 1973 to
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 23

1976 at the acropolis of Tell Mardikh, for example, 60 km from Aleppo in north-west Syria, archæologists unearthed the royal palace of Ebla (2400­2250 bc), including nearly seventeen thousand tablets lying in Ebla's administrative sector, audience court and royal archives. The tablets display a wide variety of subjects: history, literature, agriculture, language, but above all finances and economy. Indeed, most address taxes, tributes, state correspondence, caravans, trade missions and reports. It was predominantly the reading of bureaucrats, accountants and clerks; only a small percentage conveyed non-administrative subjects. One can assume, from Ebla's significance, that this typified larger cities' reading material for the era. The Sumerian Uruk iii period (c. 3000 bc) ­ that is, before continuous texts were written ­ had yielded the very earliest readings: `lexical' lists.27 True literary texts were unknown until about 2500 bc under the Akkadians who, at first, wrote only in Sumerian. Literary texts in Old Akkadian itself only began to appear after 2334 bc, under Sargon I.28 These are chiefly hymns to the gods, songs with entreaties for the king, cult dirges and exorcisms of evil spirits. An important Sumerian myth memorialized the journey of the goddess Inanna to the underworld. Akkadian scribes also preserved the Sumerian divine order of the world. The tales of Uruk's kings Enmerkar, Lugalbanda and especially Gilgamesh dominated the epic genre.29 The Sumero-Akkadian writing system conveyed a wealth of oral genres: epic, legal, medical, culinary, astronomical, mathematical, historical, religious, love poems and many more.30 Didactic poetry was particularly `popular' (always a relative term) in ancient Babylon, such as the Akkadian epic of the creation of the world from the era of King Hammurabi (c. eighteenth century bc), glorifying the god Marduk. Such works combine epic and hymn in a rather discordant literary hybrid. Above all, Akkadian literature excelled in prayers and conjurations. About 1000 bc a tone of pessimism infused its literature, as in the celebrated psalm `I Will Praise the Lord of Wisdom', which laments the injustice done to the suffering righteous. There was also writing that only supernatural beings were meant to read. During the first millennium bc at the city of Nippur (in today's Iraq), for example, people purchasing clay
24 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

bowls inscribed with Aramaic incantations believed that, through reading the incantations, malevolent spirits would become trapped under the bowls. That is, the writing itself held magical power. It required no human audience. Few Middle Eastern texts earlier than the first centuries of the second millennium bc have survived. The evidence suggests, for example, that most of the oral Gilgamesh poems ­ the great King of Uruk who vainly searched for immortality ­ were not actually written down until c. 1200 bc. Their final recension occurred at the library of King Ashurbanipal (ruled 669­633 bc), the last great ruler of the Assyrian Empire. Most reading of course involved things of the everyday economy, which the era's scribes performed with the ease and efficiency of today's white-collar worker. More than 75 per cent of the 150,000 cuneiform inscriptions so far excavated in Mesopotamia are bookkeeping and administrative records, the earliest of which are mostly simple lists of goods, people, payments and such.31 As with Ebla, all early Mesopotamian centres had `libraries', that is archives and files, not the literary repositories we know today. Such depots of readily accessible information were held to be essential for the proper administration of burgeoning citystates. By the end of the second millennium bc these depots of clay tablets, papyri, wooden boards, bamboo sticks, silk or leather were empowering societies in Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Iranian Plateau, the Ægean, the Indus Valley, Uzbekistan/Tajikistan and Central China. As all reading was then aloud, the simile `loud as a library' would everywhere have been appropriate. Sumerians called those who catalogued libraries `ordainers of the universe'.32 Cataloguing a library means fragmenting human experience. All catalogization is subjective and arbitrary, an offence to the written work: that is, to something intrinsically universal and indivisible. This offence has been committed in every epoch, generally in the name of utilitarianism. Since life itself is uncatalogued, reading should be uncatalogued. However, this is impractical. More useful access to information is won only through limiting the limitless, as the earliest literate societies already discovered.
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 25

At his capital, Nineveh, Ashurbanipal of Assyria possessed a cuneiform library that so far has yielded nearly twenty-five thousand inscribed clay tablets. Ashurbanipal revered writing. He was himself literate, a rarity for a ruler at the time. He boasted that he could `read tablets written before the Flood', that is ancient texts which evidently had been preserved for many centuries.33 His declared love of reading shows the veneration literacy enjoyed at this time. Ashurbanipal even sent agents to every corner of Mesopotamia in search of tablets for the palace library. His personal letter to an official named Shadanu is revealing in this regard:
Seek out and bring me the precious tablets for which there are no transcripts existing in Assyria. I have just now written to the temple overseer and the mayor of Borsippa that you, Shadanu, are to keep the tablets in your storehouse and that nobody shall refuse to hand over tablets to you. If you hear of any tablet or ritual text that is suitable for the palace, seek it out, secure it, and send it here.34

In this way Ashurbanipal amassed an uncommonly large library for the epoch. It held an unusually high percentage of ritual writings, too: astrology, omens and incantations ­ that is, resources for understanding, placating and coercing the gods. In his letter Ashurbanipal draws a significant distinction between `tablet' and `ritual text', betraying the acquired importance of devotional reading. But works of mathematics, medicine, astronomy, epic poetry, songs, hymns, bilingual Sumerian-Babylonian dictionaries and many other subjects also found favour. Here, reading is unmistakably appreciated as being a fount of general knowledge and a means to access and direct the divine. (Today, Ashurbanipal's library offers the richest source of reading about the ancient cultures of Sumer, Babylonia and Assyria.) Found on one particular medicinal tablet, most of which was destroyed, was the revelation:
Palace of Ashurbanipal, king of totality, king of Assyria, whom [the gods] Nabu and Tashmetum gave broad wisdom, who acquired sharp eyes: The best of the scribal art, such works as
26 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

none of the kings who went before me had ever learnt, remedies from the top of the head to the toenails, non-canonical selections, clever teachings, whatever pertains to the medical mastery of [the gods] Ninurta and Gula, I wrote on tablets, checked and collated, and deposited within my palace for perusing and reading.35

That is, it was Ashurbanipal himself writing these words, revealing the ultimate purpose of his remarkable collection: `perusing and reading'. Because of his pre-eminence, Ashurbanipal also received correspondence from throughout Assyria and beyond. At the end of one such letter the royal secretary, the one customarily screening Ashurbanipal' s incoming post, encountered the illuminating appeal: `Whoever you are, scribe, who is going to read this letter, do not conceal anything from the King, my lord, so that the gods Bel and Nabu ¯ should speak kindly of you to the King.'36 Again, `read' is understood as signifying `read aloud, recite'. In these early societies, where the written word was the spoken word, the highest integrity was demanded of each scribal secretary. It was with good reason that one of the laws of the Babylonian king Hammurabi demanded death for him who bore false witness, a law targeting primarily scribes, society's chief witnesses. Censorship took place often. This mainly involved effacing what was written on public monuments and on temple and palace walls in order to erase the luminary's memory, the highest form of public disgrace. But texts were altered, too: either directly, by scraping off and rewriting (which was impossible on hard clay tablets, necessitating frequent forgeries), or indirectly, by editing a wholly new text, that is, by `rewriting history'. This occurred with surprising frequency, for many reasons: filial or fraternal hatred, clan rivalry, altered ethic or religion, invasion and other things. Readers of course then read only what the new regime wanted them to read, which was as far from `factual objectivity' (a modern conceit) as the effaced propaganda had been. Ancient reading so frequently displays poignant humanity. The son of one of Hammurabi's high officials wrote to his mother:
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 27

May my father and the gods keep you well. Gentlemen's clothes improve year by year. The son of Adadiddinam, whose father is a mere underling of my father, has received two new garments, but you keep getting upset over just one garment for me. Though you gave birth to me, his mother adopted him; whereas his mother loves him, you do not love me.37

Through this and many similarly moving and enlightening passages we come to appreciate how Mesopotamian reading already encompassed an entire universe of human experience, its poignancy made all the more immediate by our awareness that, in writing's place of birth, the voice and the sign were still one.

egypt
The commonest Egyptian word for reading, s dj, also signified `recite', and it was for this reason that the Egyptian scribe whose words began this chapter wrote of a book being `in the mouth of the speaker who reads him'. Reading in ancient Egypt, too, was doubly oral: not only was writing understood to be visible speech, but all reading was physically performed aloud through a scribe-witness. We read on a cuneiform tablet letter, therefore, sent to Egypt from the Hurrians (an important Near Eastern people in the middle of the second millennium bc): `And Kelia, my messenger, said this word: thus speaking, "Your brother, Nimmoria, the lord of Egypt, made a great gift"'.38 As in Mesopotamia, written correspondence in Egypt was not reading as we know it, but the official witnessing of an oral medium. All letters generally began with the statement, `Say to So-and-so, the king of So-and-so, my brother etc. ...', including the dictator's verbal instructions to the scribe. Here, too, the written word was not an end in itself, but a means to an end, a socially sanctioned medium (not yet an autonomous channel) through which the scribe was permitted to speak on behalf of the person dictating the message. The `true' message lay not in the cuneiform tablet or papyrus missive, but in the ultimate oral transmission: that is, the scribe reading the message aloud to its addressee.
28 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

As early as c. 3300 bc Egypt was already using several hundred logographic (whole-word) `hieroglyphs', written principally in ink on papyrus. The era of papyrus witnessed the rapid rise of urban federations in Egypt that would endure for over three millennia. Reading and writing are not criteria for civilization; indeed, urban activity had obtained in north-eastern Syria as early as 4000 bc, shortly before complete writing emerged. However, Egypt's Upper and Lower Kingdoms, and the Mesopotamian city-states, advanced and thrived, becoming great empires, only after reading and writing had emerged. No direct causal relationship held, of course, but few would dispute the role of reading and writing in stimulating the economic expansion that empowered such events.39 Early Egyptians appear to have appreciated reading's advantages for information access and control better than the Sumerians who had innovated complete writing. This is because the Egyptians, once they had borrowed from Sumer the concepts of logography, phonography and linearity with sequencing of signs, developed and exploited reading and writing much more quickly. One of the Egyptians' most important native innovations (there were several) was acrophony, the use of a sign to represent only a word's beginning consonant: the sign represented n, for example. (In contrast, Sumerian scribes used signs representing whole syllables, not individual consonants.) All Egyptian hieroglyphic writing furnished word `skeletons' to which the reader needed to add only the appropriate vowels, obvious to native speakers from the context.40 As early as the fourth millennium bc Egyptians were reading hieroglyphs on rock faces, slate palettes, funerary stelæ (upright stone slabs with inscriptions), cylindrical seals, jar-stoppers, pottery, ivory tablets, stone club-heads and other things. A frequent use of ink on papyri is presumed already for this earliest period. Most reading in ancient Egypt was not of hieroglyphs, however, which were very time-consuming to carve, incise or paint, but of cursive writing (only much later called `hieratic'). This script had developed as a practical tool for writing commonplace documents, such as letters, accounts, dockets and, later, as of the second millennium bc, literary texts. A simplification of hieroglyphic writing that used the same system, hieratic was read
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 29

almost exclusively on papyrus, though hieratic texts also appeared on stone, wood, plaster, leather, linen cloth, ostraca (inscribed potsherds) and other surfaces. Egyptian readers read either from right to left or from left to right; some texts follow from top to bottom. Right-to-left reading became the `default' direction, if no clear reason existed to choose otherwise. Once formalized between c. 3300 and 2500 bc, hieroglyphs, hieratic writing and their readings remained little changed for well over two thousand years. (Most readers in northern Africa and the Middle East have kept a right-to-left reading direction ever since.) Once a pupil had completed several years of intensive instruction in a special scribal school, the reading of Egyptian hieroglyphic and hieratic texts came to be a relatively undemanding practice, with quality of literacy of course varying greatly (being primarily task-orientated). Perhaps more significantly, papyrus was thin, lightweight, flexible and easily held and stored. One could even combine papyrus sheets and roll them up as a long narrow scroll, needing only simple unrolling in order to read a voluminous text. (Such reading ease was unknown in Mesopotamia, with its unwieldy clay tablets.) The `oldest book in the world' is the Pruss Papyrus, whose texts of the Fifth Dynasty (c. 2500­2350 bc) were copied, in hieratic script, approximately four hundred years later than this. As early as the Third or Fourth Dynasty, however, continuous texts were being written in Egypt. Though in theory the writing system could then be used for nearly any purpose, Egyptian scribes still did not exploit its full capabilities. By c. 2150 bc, at the end of the Old Kingdom, several categories of text were common: private contracts, legal decrees and proceedings, letters, long religious and magical texts as well as `biographical' inscriptions.41 Probably technical writings existed, too, but apparently no intrinsically `literary' texts were yet entrusted to papyrus, wood or leather: the oral tradition prevailed in all genres, keeping writing restricted to documentation, not creative expression. Few Egyptians ever learnt to read. For most of the country's ancient history, probably not more than one in a hundred was literate at any given time. Considering how Egypt's population
30 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

rose from the Old Kingdom's estimated one million to the Greco-Roman era's 4.5 million (when Greek residents comprised the literate majority), perhaps no more than ten to fifty thousand could read in the entire empire.42 These literates comprised the élite, distinguished in their society chiefly, but not exclusively (for most used scribal slaves), by their ability to read and write. They and the scribal sub-élite almost exclusively occupied all administrative offices. Unlike Mesopotamia, Egypt shows no evidence of scribes enjoying substantial careers separate from public office. The village scribe, however, was similarly a respected amanuensis for hire, who provided the 99 per cent of non-literates with the customary access to reading and writing. All Egyptians could, of course, `read' such pictorially reinforced inscriptions as those on the walls of the Temple of Luxor at ancient Thebes, heralding the story of the triumphant charge of chariot-borne archers under Pharaoh Ramesses II against the Hittites in 1300 bc. The average literate himself could probably read little more than simple words here and there in the inscription, perhaps even a few familiar names in recognizable combinations of hieroglyphs.43 The best-known names would be such frequently occurring sign groupings or cartouches as that of Menkheperre`, the prenomen of Thutmose III (1479­1425 bc), which has survived on thousands of scarabs. However, only very few Egyptians, perhaps one out of five hundred or even fewer, could actually read a monumental inscription in its entirety. Because so very few ancient Egyptians could read and write, and those who did exclusively comprised the élite (or their slaves), the faculty was held in extremely high regard. Here, scribes actually occupied a social station much more elevated than that of their Mesopotamian counterparts. As the Egyptian bureaucrat Dua-Khety told his son Pepy four millennia ago while they sailed south along the Nile to a school for scribes:
Set your thoughts just on writings, for I have seen people saved by their labour. Behold, there is nothing greater than writings. They are like a boat on water. Let me cause you to love writing more than [you love] your mother. Let me usher
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 31

its beauty into your sight. For it is greater than any office. There is nothing like it on earth.44

The profession of Egyptian scribe could be `a princely profession', as Dua-Khety further maintained: `His writing materials and his rolls of books bring pleasantness and riches'. Many scribes went on to become palace officials and ministers, among the wealthiest and most powerful men in the empire. Most scribes, however, remained subordinates who carried out the mundane business of the realm. Literacy was necessary for high status, but then the physical act of writing was subsequently most often delegated by those few who had actually attained to that status. Illustrative of this is the polite way of saying `you' in written Egyptian correspondence: `your scribe', that is, the subordinate encharged to read the missive aloud to his literate superior.45 As in Mesopotamia, hyperopic (far-sighted) readers would also have had reading aids. It has recently been argued that the Egyptians might have known of the special properties of glass lenses as early as the beginning of the second millennium bc, when glass production became common along the Nile. It is indeed possible that readers with hyperopia compensated by using disks of polished glass or clear stone. A papyrus scroll held behind a clear drinking glass filled with water would also have been magnified and perfectly legible to any suffering from hyperopia: this would have been common knowledge in ancient times. Many of the glass vessels preserved from antiquity might actually have served reading as frequently as drinking; society's readers, the élite (or their slaves), owned most glass vessels. Almost from the beginning, writing in Egypt served two main purposes: administration and monumental display.46 But apparently for the first half millennium after writing's introduction in Egypt continuous texts were unknown. The earliest written records, indeed the beginning of `history' itself, comprised merely the simple names of regnal years. Because the élite had early seized on writing's social power ­ the bulk of Egyptian reading being administrative, its practitioners society's privileged ­ élite status was wholly identified with literacy.47 (Evidence suggests that later pharaohs themselves were literate,
32 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

something which obtained only rarely in Mesopotamia.)48 Very little of Egypt's wealth of administrative literature has survived, however. What has endured the millennia, primarily architectural or monumental inscriptions, represents only a fraction of what was once written down. It is in no way representative of the majority of ancient reading. Indeed, it is one of history's greatest ironies that this glorious society, which is so identified with writing (that is, with hieroglyphs), whose temples, tombs, monuments and statues veritably brimmed over with writing, enjoyed the fewest actual readers. But public texts were to impress, not to inform. Contemporaries who could actually read them had been their engravers. Inscriptions were written for the centuries, perceived `readers' the future faceless hordes of venerators ­ or so imagined the inscriptions' illustrious authors. This means the Egyptian hieroglyphs that survive today, on mummy coffins, tomb walls, monumental columns and statuary, were probably only seldom, if ever, read in the lifetime of their addressor. They were almost exclusively ostentatious propaganda for the divine as well as the living, and funerary messages to the gods of the afterlife and to the deceased, calling out the magical words to awake the spirit. What was actually read was mountains of administrative papyri, and these have almost entirely vanished. The very earliest Egyptian literary, as distinct from administrative, texts are the Pyramid Texts, hidden in the royal burial apartments.49 These comprise the funerary literature inscribed in pyramid burial chambers of the Fourth and Fifth Dynasties. The late twenty-fifth-century bc wall-to-wall inscriptions filling the antechamber of the Pyramid of Unas at Saqqara, for example, describe the ruler's perilous journey through the underworld to his rightful place among the gods. The literate thirteenthcentury bc builder of royal tombs, Peshdu, covered the ceiling of his own tomb with the Litany of Re, a holy text celebrating the Sun God's eternal passage between heaven and the underworld. Statuettes depicting the lowest classes ­ farmworkers, labourers and others ­ were incised with the names of the deceased and placed in the graves of the wealthy to serve them in the afterlife. All such hallowed `Utterances', preserving Egypt's earliest
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 33

recorded religious beliefs, memorialize the hereafter, incant against evil and/or perform holy office for the dead, to be read by gods alone, of whom the deceased was seeking inclusion. Comprising a pharaoh's or aristocrat's `passport to eternity', they addressed and permitted no other readers. It was the world's most exclusive college. One preserved text in a nobleman's tomb reads:
You that voyage over the sky, Re and Thoth, take him unto you to be with you, that he may eat of that whereof you eat; that he may drink of that whereof you drink; that he may live on that whereon you live; that he may dwell there where you dwell; that he may be strong wherein you are strong; that he may voyage there where you voyage.50

Similar otherworldly reading included tens of thousands of sarcophagal inscriptions and the ubiquitous Book of the Dead, a papyrus roll given to the deceased to take with him or her into the afterlife. Temple walls, columns and statuary, too, abounded with inscriptions addressing an immortal readership. The Temple of Isis at Philae, for example, every internal surface of which was covered with writing and some design-work, described royal gifts to `immortal witnesses' of a literal ilk. Greater biographical information than mere title strings and captions began appearing on royal monuments only after the Old Kingdom period, and included ethical precepts, marks of royal favour, assertions of social norms and so forth.51 During the Middle Kingdom scribes incorporated outstanding events. Actual literary texts also began to appear: `wisdom' literature, narratives, hymns, medical, magical, mathematical, astronomical and calendrical texts. None was `popular' in the modern sense, of course, for readership was extremely small and socially restricted. One remarkable feature of such ancient Egyptian texts is that most of them were written down in a special form of metre, that is their language patterns were formalized into individual units of two or three stresses each. The New Kingdom heralded literary genres for a wider audience. Many papyri from this era contain love poems and simple stories of folkloric cast.52 Religious texts described rituals of daily
34 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

devotion and supernatural events. There were papyrus rolls of hymns, myths and magical formulas. Works on medicine (including gynæcology and veterinary science), mathematics, history and lexicography (long lists of animals, plants, parts of the body and geographical names as memory prompts) have survived the millennia. As in Mesopotamia, didactic texts were rife, in particular those providing instructions in practical living, such as the `Teaching of King Amenemhet' or the later `Book of Wisdom of Amenemope', extolling modesty and self-control. Famous in this context is the `Conversation of a Melancholic with His Soul', probably ancient Egypt's most profound literary legacy. Numerous writings also describe or praise, sometimes ironically, life at a scribal school. Factual tales, such as the `History of Sinuhe', mixing adventure with worldly wisdom, were very common. In the later Greek era, fiction in particular assumed a special place among Egyptian readers. Dramatic texts for religious festivals surfaced. And everywhere poetic texts, of strict metrical structure, abounded, ranging from work songs to pæans to the gods or pharaoh. (Two significant collections of Egyptian love songs, for example, have survived.) At all levels of society letters were always an extremely important reading material. Around 1500 bc international epistles comprised clay cuneiform tablets small enough to be carried in one hand, such as the Babylonian king Kadasman-Enlil's invitation to Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV), pharaoh of Egypt:
I am going to have a house-warming. Come yourself to eat and drink with me. In attendance shall be twenty-five women and twenty-five men.53

The above belongs to the collection of some 380 letters, covering approximately three decades, discovered in the late 1800s at Tell El-Amarna (ancient Akhenaten). The period of the Amarna Letters, as they came to be called, includes the entire reign of Akhenaten (1353­1336 bc), when Egypt's culture and political power were at their zenith, distinguishing the most powerful kingdom the world had yet known. The letters consist of diplomatic correspondence between the pharaoh and his
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 35

contemporaries in neighbouring lands, as well as his vassals governing cities and towns under Egyptian administration. Each letter follows a strict protocol of diplomatic rhetoric. They often commence with such courteous salutations as:
Say to Nimmureya [Akhenaten], the king of Egypt my brother, my son-in-law, whom I love and who loves me: `Thus, Tushratta, the king of Mitanni, your father-in-law, who loves you, your brother [ally]. For me all goes well. For you may all go well. For your household, for your wives, for your sons, for your magnates, for your chariots, for your horses, for your warriors, for your country and whatever else belongs to you, may all go very, very well'.54

Whereupon the correspondent would customarily follow this with a plea for troops, money, gifts and the like. Or, rarely, quite the opposite. In his letter, Tushratta was announcing his own gift to Akhenaten ... of a concubine:
`She has become very mature, and she has been fashioned according to my brother's [your] desire. And, furthermore, my brother will note that the greeting gift that I shall present is greater than any before.'

Written entirely in cuneiform, the Amarna Letters mostly convey Old Babylonian, the language of diplomacy and trade at this time, the lingua franca of the ancient Near East. For his response, however, the pharaoh would dictate in Egyptian to a scribe who wrote hieratic signs in ink on papyrus. The scribe then passed this along to a royal translator who composed an Old Babylonian version, in turn inscribing this in cuneiform on a clay tablet to be dispatched by a palace courier. The courier would hasten to the addressee's locale, seek admittance, then deliver the tablet to the proper authority, who would then bring the tablet to the addressee, together with a translator if required, and the text of the letter would be read aloud. One of the most poignant letters of the Amarna Period was one sent to King Suppiluliumash of the Hittites by Ankhesenpaaten, Tutankhamun's young widow, who was being
36 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

pressed to wed the 30-year-older designated successor Ay:
My husband has died and I have no son. They say about you that you have many sons. You might give me one of your sons, and he might become my husband. I would not want to take one of my servants [i.e., Ay]. I am loath to make him my husband.

The Hittite king acquiesced. But then his young son was murdered on his way to Egypt, and so Ankhesenpaaten, probably fearing for her own life, condescended to marry Ay. Ancient Egyptian reading was far more than information conveyance: the very spirit of a text was being conveyed as well. Unlike Mesopotamia's utilitarian cuneiform wedges, Egyptian hieroglyphs, in particular, were believed to hold magical power. Reading them on sarcophagi and tomb walls and ceilings was a divine utterance, helping to bring their message into fulfilment. For the same reason, their frequent defacement meant to preclude the lives, deeds and socio-spiritual power of their owners being called back into life again through reading aloud. For reading such things was an act of creation itself. Just as in Mesopotamia, however, Egypt had its assortment of libraries: at palaces, temples, administrative centres and even the private residences of wealthy literates. From Edfu has come a catalogue of catalogues, dating from c. 2000 bc, revealing how ancient Egyptian librarians, too, were attempting to define their world of experience with such categories as `The List of All Writings Engraved in Wood', `The Book of Places and What Is in Them', `The Book of What Is to Be Found in the Temple' and many more.55 Over the millennia Egypt arrived at transmitting noteworthy written texts in generally accurate copies. The most prestigious were probably narratives and didactic writings; these maintained a well-defined structure in a distinctly `non-oral' style (usually that of brief epithets, to be read aloud in a form of metre). Of similar importance were Egyptian magical texts; these were very widely read, the spells' efficacy dependent on the accuracy of their copyists. None the less, ancient Egyptians never achieved a discursive or analytic history, never implemented a religious
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 37

canon or exegesis (such as Judaism, Christianity or Islam were later to implement through reading). There was neither an indigenous oral epic nor scripture. Egyptians remained in a common intermediate position, their society `aided by literacy but not transformed by it'.56

spreading the written word
The idea, as well as many conventions, of Mesopotamian writing diffused also eastward. For the Proto-Elamite people of the Iranian Plateau c. 3000 bc, reading was actuarial: their longest surviving text, comprising only seven lines, treats of sheep delivered as taxes to the central administration at Susa. Yet five hundred years earlier, people as far away as the Indus Valley were using potters' marks to write names and/or places; this then apparently developed into the (assumed) logosyllabic writing system of the Indus Valley civilization, which thrived between 2500 and 1900 bc. It is probable that the Indus people predominantly wrote on something perishable like leather or wood, which has since rotted away, leaving no trace. Although no literature has survived from this rich culture (that is, no long tablets, papyri or monumental inscriptions), the ubiquity of the many inscribed seals, brief clay and faience tablets, bronze tools and utensils, bone and ivory rods and other things ­ usually bearing two or three signs in a line and five signs in total ­ suggests a restricted and rudimentary `literacy'. In a side room of the northern gateway at the ancient centre of Dholavira was found an inscription comprised of signs more than 30 cm in height: perhaps it was a `public sign' of some sort. Used principally to validate and solidify economic authority, reading and writing in the ancient Indus Valley appear also to have been closely associated with the ruling élite of leading centres, in particular Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro.57 By c. 2000 bc, syllabic reading ­ that is, of in-di-vi-du-al syllables ­ was enriching the Semites of Byblos in the Levant, the Luwians of Anatolia (today's Turkey) and the earliest Greeks of the Ægean. In fact, Greeks were Europe's first readers. Their various scripts ­ the Minoan Greeks' `hieroglyphic' script and
38 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

Linear A, the later Mycenæan Greeks' Linear B, Cypro-Minoan and, finally, the `Cypriote Syllabic Script' ­ mainly conveyed accounting. However, there were longer readings, such as dedications, contracts and even royal proclamations. This latter use of Ægean writing is evidenced by Crete's celebrated Phaistos Disk, Europe's earliest literature. Unearthed in 1908 and dating from c. 1600 bc, this baked clay disk, 16 cm in diameter with 241 hieroglyphic syllabic signs imprinted on both sides, apparently conveys a `mobilization proclamation' in Minoan Greek.58 The text on the Phaistos Disk is too short to be documentation: a native speaker could easily have memorized its message. As a royal proclamation disk, however, it validated the oral performance in a similar manner to much later Hebrew, Christian and Islamic reading performances, which emphasize the authority speaking through the written word. (Today, though he knows each text by heart the Pope, for example, still chants before an open book.) With the Phaistos Disk, the herald was not so much `reading' as performing a royal act: becoming the voice of (possibly) the Minos of Crete himself. Was there a body of `literature' to read in any of the several Ægean scripts of prehistory? None has appeared so far. It is possible such literature ­ hymns, songs, epic histories in imitation of those of the Greeks' influential trading partners the Canaanites and Egyptians ­ did indeed find written expression, but on perishable leather and papyrus. Certainly only a small handful of people in this early European society could read and write. And the rudimentary libraries at Knossos, Phaistos, Mycenæ, Athens and elsewhere would only rarely have transcended immediate archival requirements. Here, too, `literature' was still perceived as something intrinsically oral. By the fourteenth to thirteenth centuries bc at Ugarit (modern Ras Shamra') in the northern Levant, however, scribes were actively recording myths, legends, rituals, contracts and thousands of bookkeeping records in the local alphabetic script written in cuneiform wedges. And within three hundred years the great age of inscriptions began in Phoenicia, using fully developed consonantal alphabetic writing. But who were the readers of the hundreds of stelæ and other stone monuments erected at Byblos, Tyre, Sidon, Beirut, Ashkelon and other
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 39

coastal centres? For here, too, only very few people could read, perhaps no more than one in a hundred. In point of fact such inscribed monuments were more a show than a practice of reading. The ruler's act of having left a written statement sufficed; it was unnecessary to hear his voice. Power and prestige lay in presence. Aramaic writing developed from Phoenician around the tenth century bc, and by the eighth or seventh century bc Aramaic had become the main language and script of the Near East, the lingua franca of the entire region. Eventually it became the official language of the Persian Empire (550­330 bc). In the sixth century bc, for example, Persia's King Darius, who also left many inscribed monuments, placed in the audience hall at Persepolis two trilingual gold plaques (replicated also in silver) asking the god Ahuramazda ¯ in Aramaic to protect Darius and safeguard his household. As with Egypt's temple and tomb inscriptions, this was reading for gods alone, but now on small portable wealth. Aramaic writing also replaced Assyrian cuneiform: ink on leather or papyrus was now preferred over wedges in soft clay. The Age of Clay was coming to an end, never to return. In the main, Aramaic `literature' similarly comprised official documents, general administration, accounts, bookkeeping, monumental inscriptions and other things. Of crucial importance was Aramaic's inspiration of the writing system of the Indian subcontinent, the first longer documents of which are the famous edicts of King Asoka from c. 253­250 bc, carved on stone pillars or rocks throughout Hindustan.

religion and reading
As the amount of reading and writing increased, everywhere the visually talented displaced the orally talented. (In the West, Middle East and China, this process was essentially complete by classical antiquity.) Religion played an enormous role in this transformation. Throughout history, one of the chief motors of literacy has been religion. Priest-scribes had been among society's first readers. They were followed by élite scholars and then
40 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

by lay celebrants, who, in turn, expanded and diversified their reading material, eventually leading to a concept of general education. It is an illuminating fact in the history of reading that the distribution of writing systems and scripts in the world today `reflects the distribution of the world religions far more clearly than it does the distribution of language families'.59 Because writing is such an effective medium of arresting, preserving and conveying sacred knowledge, able to safeguard verbatim the extended teachings of venerated personalities without human oral mediation, reading and writing of religious literature began to play an ever more salient role in society. In Western Europe, religious literature came to dominate reading for well over a thousand years. (In other parts of the world, particularly Islamic nations, it still dominates reading.) In the first millennium bc readers of religious literature were mainly priests who had trained as scribes. They wrote down oral traditions dictated to them, which they then read aloud at sacred offices. Forming a special élite, they were able to influence, control and steer society by virtue of their unique position. It was at this time that the phrase `for it is written' came to take on authoritative, indeed divine, significance, which lingers with us still. Society's literary readers ­ that is, the same priest-scribes ­ also became commentators. In time, owing to the authority of their authors, the commentaries themselves became scripture: that is, holy writ. A significant amount of the world's religious reading emerged in the last half of the first millennium bc. Buddhism's Pal Canon, for example, deriving from oral tradition and containing the teaching of the Buddha (c. 563-483 bc), was written down in Pali, the canonical language for Buddhists from many countries. As Buddhism developed, comparable texts in other languages flourished, especially in East Asia among the Chinese, Koreans and Japanese. At the same time, Hinduism was being conveyed through a variety of texts known collectively as the Ve ¯ das; written in the Sanskrit language, these were chiefly preserved through a strict oral tradition insisting on accuracy of pronunciation. In fact, most religious writings failed to experience direct veneration. Only the oral tradition was truly venerated. In the West, however, veneration of the written
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 41

texts themselves emerged (see Chapter 2). This custom was institutionalized by the Jews who, many centuries later, inspired early Christians to emulation. Up until the fifth century bc reading was essentially passive. It involved overwhelmingly accounts, tallies, despatches, bills of lading and legal documents and only a very limited amount of literary texts. None integrated the reader as an active interpreter-analyst, but prompted him or her to retrieve simple accounts or information or to recall something that had earlier been committed to memory. Such things as legends, myths, incantations, chants and holy writ were still rarely written down, their veneration reserved for the `real' oral tradition. Preliterates and non-literates were still displaying prodigious oral feats of memory. Such ability had been innate, of course, appearing to be exceptional only to literates who no longer daily exercised humankind's natural oral talents. Oral ability weakens upon accession to literacy. Antiquity's first readers, accountants and bookkeepers, had begun discovering new strengths that then displaced the oral endowment. Favouring visual mnemonics, reading enabled memorization of higher-order structures and facilitated novel categorizing devices or techniques (such as alphabetic listing or acrophonic prompting) that augment the process of mental retrieval. With consonantal alphabetic writing's diffusion from Egypt, Sinai and Canaan, however, reading transcended that monopoly of bookkeeping scribes serving the rich and powerful. No longer requiring many years of intense study at a scribal school, reading could now be practised by all after only a few months of learning a simple alphabet. Its simplicity also invited borrowing by foreign languages, usually requiring only minimal conversion to convey indigenous sounds. In many different countries, people of all ranks and classes now learnt to do their own bookkeeping and to read anything they desired. Humanity's thirst for knowledge and love of learning served as kindling to incipient reading. Perhaps this need, not only to know, but to know more, prompted very early on the passion and respect for reading that was, in time, to overwhelm the globe. Humankind's latest advantage over other creatures has been our
42 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

ability to seek out and organize information. This occurred first through articulate speech, then through writing, then through ever more advanced forms and ways of reading. But literacy is a response; not a stimulus.60 Literacy does not cause social and cognitive change (though it is probably a necessary precondition for some changes). Once larger complex societies rise, literacy can enhance complex organization, primarily by aiding memory and providing access to knowledge (via files, archives, libraries) to a degree no human mind can achieve unaided. Those who read can extend their communication spatially and temporally; they can also expand their memory in compass and duration. Though the early scribes did all this in keeping records, exchanging letters, identifying commodities and even extolling rulers in monumental inscriptions, they seldom distinguished this faculty from oral performance: that is, the skills of the tallykeeper, messenger and herald. The appreciation of reading's real potential began very late in reading's development ­ in point of fact some three thousand years after writing's elaboration in Mesopotamia. With the written word's gifts came also its tyranny. As a result of their voluntary metamorphosis literates lost oral memory, oral culture, oral freedom. An artificial authority, the written word, imposed itself on every literate person: a human-created tyrant enthralling its devoted subject. Today, having entirely lost our oral patrimony, we are quite unconscious of the tyrant's ubiquitous levies as we live, think, believe, revere through the written word, oblivious to a world of other possibilities. We are, all of us, reading's unwitting vassals. Yet most people would accept that this is a small price to pay for one of life's greatest wonders: personal command over space and time. All of history's known languages and cultures endure only through reading, in this way continuing to participate in the human drama as they attest to the glory and struggle of our common past: Sumerian, Egyptian, Akkadian, Persian, Sanskrit, Classical Chinese, Greek, Hebrew, Latin, Classical Arabic and hundreds more. For, over the millennia, the `immortal witness' eventually became humanity's own voice.
t h e i m m o r t a l w i t n e s s . 43

A sarcophagus-frieze carved soon after ad 270, depicting a scroll-reading philosopher, perhaps the Alexandria-trained Plotinus.

t wo

The Papyrus Tongue

At dinner, when my wife is present or a few friends, I have a book read aloud; after dinner a comedy or lyre playing; afterwards a stroll with my people, among whom are erudite individuals. Thus the evening passes in varied discussions, and even the longest day is quickly seasoned.1

The writer and administrator Pliny the Younger (c. ad 62­c. 113), known particularly for his voluminous correspondence, well appreciated reading's place in ancient Rome, at least among the patrician élite. This is because most non-essential reading, during nearly all of classical antiquity, was entertainment and announcement, read aloud by servants or slaves trained in the art. When Emperor Augustus (63 bc ­ ad 14) found it impossible to sleep, for example, he summoned, as his biographer Suetonius (c. ad 75­150) tells us, readers or story-tellers. All classical instruction had as its ultimate goal not so much the acquisition of knowledge as the perfection of eloquence. Greeks and Romans, after their respective archaic periods, certainly used writing extensively. But their daily lives were still dominated by the spoken word. They dictated letters, heard recitations, listened to news, attended their slaves' readings of literature and correspondence. Orality, not literacy, ruled ancient Mediterranean society. What had changed was that, with writing's sudden proliferation, Greeks and Romans of various ranks and classes were reading aloud from hand-held scrolls of papyrus (and from waxed tablets). That is, even masters themselves were now declaiming with a papyrus tongue. Of course, the vast majority of Greece's and Rome's populations lived and died with little or no use, even indirectly, of
45

reading and writing.2 The patricians who did make frequent use of reading and writing typically preferred using others for the task; they themselves, with no incentive to do otherwise, rarely advanced beyond only a rudimentary level of reading competence. From early in Greek and Roman history, daily intimacy with reading and writing certainly approached universality among this ruling élite who sought only `the noblest pursuits' in their readings, as the Greek historian Diodorus Siculus (d after 21 BC) professed. But `widespread literacy' existed only secondhand, and among a very small minority ­ that is, the literate slaves who read to their semi-literate patrician mistresses and masters. Three millennia after complete writing's elaboration in Mesopotamia, reading occurred with a variety of materials. The Dead Sea Scrolls reveal that much writing in Middle Eastern isolation occurred on skins, though gold, silver, copper and bronze were also used for exceptional documents. Monumental inscriptions ­ eminently visible today, but rare exceptions in antiquity ­ heralded in stone. Of course the great majority of everyday reading occurred in the form of waxed tablets. Nearly all correspondence and daily minutiæ were recorded on, and read aloud from, these easily erasable surfaces, the raised borders and hard covers of which protected the writing inside. Even entire works of literature appeared in waxed-tablet format. But the king of surfaces was papyrus, imported from Egypt. Greeks had probably already used Egyptian papyrus at Knossos, Mycenæ and other early Ægean centres during the second millennium BC. But then the custom waned. Only around the seventh century BC did numerous Greek merchants and mercenaries, who were making Naucratis in Egypt a thriving centre of Greek commerce, encounter papyrus again on a daily basis. It was not until the Anabasis by the Greek general and historian Xenophon (431­c. 355 BC), however, that papyrus was mentioned by a Greek writer. Up to the mid-fourth century BC the Greeks in Hellas itself, it appears, `lacked a common, inexpensive writing material accessible to all'.3 Early Greeks wrote on whatever was available: potsherds, waxed tablets, skins of every sort, even sheets of gold and silver and thin plates of lead. (Lead was actually prescribed for incantations.) But as such materials were not conducive to easy and compendious
46 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

reading, few longer works were written down. As ever, one relied foremost on human memory. When papyrus became a more familiar, if still extremely expensive, writing material, however, the trade in it suddenly boomed, prompting in turn more reading and writing along eastern Mediterranean shores. Egypt eventually produced huge amounts of papyrus for the Greek and, later, the Roman markets. The demand maintained a complete industry along the Nile, sustaining thousands. Eventually a book trade in papyrus scrolls developed in Rome, with scores of publishers who, in turn, employed hundreds of scribes and illustrators. Still, few could afford to own a book (scroll). Libraries accounted for some sales; otherwise all copies went to extremely wealthy patrons. The prime expense was the papyrus itself: each of the many middlemen involved in its import from Egypt demanded his percentage. Nevertheless, once papyrus became a major trade commodity, books and reading become commonplaces along the Mediterranean, and even beyond.4 The papyrus sheets were joined to form a scroll, which had to be rolled open in order to read. Because of this, the publishing of lengthy works was rather `awkward', at least by our standards. In antiquity Homer's Iliad, for example, probably comprised 24 separate scrolls, as it contains 24 individual books; only much later, with the emergence of codices of individual pages, were such books within one work reinterpreted as individual `chapters'. Similarly awkward was the viewing of a papyrus scroll one sequential frame at a time, like `scrolling' down through today's computer-screen pages. Because of the ancient book's format, a reader naturally comprehended reading as something intrinsically sequential. But this uniquely fitted oral reading, which was necessarily sequential, too. The normally contiguous text (with no word separation, punctuation or upper/lower case distinction) followed the natural flow of oratory. The physical act of reading aloud parses the text into its constituent features, giving meaning to the tongue where no meaning is evident to the eye. Though punctuation was devised early (by Aristophanes of Byzantium, c. 200 BC), it was primarily used in ambiguous cases to distinguish the desired pronunciation and intonation in
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 47

public performance. A universal, standardized punctuation, such as may be used throughout a text in consistent fashion, only became fashionable nearly two thousand years later, after the introduction of printing in Western Europe. Now conveying almost exclusively meaning, not sound, punctuation has become fixed only within the last three hundred years. In an early form of textual separation, scribes wrote per cola et commata (`by clauses and phrases'). St Jerome (c. AD 347­420) was the first who described this method of segmenting a text, having discovered it in old copies of Demosthenes and Cicero, noting it `conveys more obvious sense to the readers'.5 With this, the text is divided into individual lines of coherent meaning, for easier visual recognition. It told the reader either to raise or lower the voice, in order to render sense through proper intonation. As an added advantage it also allowed easier retrieval while searching a text, something hampered by the commonly run-together writing of antiquity. Papyrus scrolls were stored in two ways: in individual round boxes, with each scroll sporting a separate label (Egyptians had had clay labels; Romans preferred papyrus, later parchment, labels), and with separate boxes holding different authors or subject matter; or on open shelves, with identification tags on the end of each scroll. Once parchment became popular by c. AD 400, with codices or bound books replacing papyrus scrolls, these were stored not vertically with spines showing, as we do today, but lying flat on the bookcase. Once learnt, reading cannot be unlearnt, and so throughout antiquity tyrannical rulers who failed to prevent literacy attacked what opponents or suspected foes were reading: the books themselves. From the very earliest days of reading in Europe, too, just as in Mesopotamia and Egypt, critical or subversive, but also introspective or merely philosophical, works of literature fed the flames of fear. In 411 BC Athenians burnt the works of the long-deceased Greek philosopher and mathematician Pythagoras (c. 580­ c. 500 BC). Emperor Augustus banned the works of the statesman and poet Gaius Cornelius Gallus (c. 69­26 BC) and the poet Ovid (43 BC ­ c. AD 17): Gallus, creator of the Roman love-elegy, took his own life rather than quit Rome, whereas Ovid, Rome's most celebrated poet after Horace's
48 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

death, never secured a pardon from his exile in Tomi (today Constant , a, Romania). Livid that their fame was greater than his, Emperor Caligula (ad 12­41; ruled 37­41) decreed the burning of all copies of works by Homer (whose Iliad and Odyssey were the West's most copied books) and two of the deceased literary legends of his era, the Roman poet Virgil (70­19 bc) and Livy (59 bc ­ ad 12), the historian of Rome. (Needless to say, the decree was ignored.) Emperor Diocletian (ad 245­313) ordered all Christian books to be burnt in ad 303, so great was his fear of their challenge to his supremacy. Because local religion had predated the acquisition of the faculty of reading, with reading thus remaining alien to the celebration of the holy offices, reading did not figure at all in the various forms of Greek and Latin liturgy, which remained exclusively oral. Deities are never mentioned or portrayed as readers. As there existed no Greek or Roman `holy scriptures', so, too, were absent myths or depictions of Zeus or Jupiter dictating sacred scrolls, as one finds emerging in Judæa at this time. (After having borrowed writing from the Greeks, the Etruscans in their art, however, depicted several of their gods as either scribes or readers.)6 Even so, among the most cherished possessions of a learned Greek or Roman were books, which comprehended an ardour otherwise reserved only for family, spouse or lover. For many, books were even closer and dearer.

the greeks
Greeks had been reading since c. 2000 BC, when the idea of syllabic writing had arrived in the Ægean from cosmopolitan Canaan. A thousand years later, a consonantal alphabet was borrowed from the Canaanites' descendants, the Phoenicians, prompting the Greek scribes of Cyprus to elaborate a complete consonant-and-vowel alphabet (the way we write today).7 At first Europe's new writing system merely replaced the more cumbersome and ambiguous syllabic writing in order to write accounts, dockets and short correspondence, mainly on skins. But soon it was also written on vases, metals, potsherds and
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 49

other things, the texts growing in length. One of the earliest inscriptions in Greek letters occurs on the Dipylon Jug (c. 730 BC), discovered near Athens's ancient western gate: `to him who dances most delicately'. It is certain that lengthy texts such as Homer's Iliad and Odyssey were also written down around this time, probably on skins, though the oldest preserved fragments, on papyrus, date only from the third century BC. In Greek anagigno ¯ sko ¯ meant `I read' as well as `I recognize, I read aloud' and, in Ionian Greek, `I convince, I talk (someone into doing something)'. Reading's very definition in Greek still denoted, then, spoken communication, oratory and persuasive rhetoric. In the seventh century BC writing in the West took a decisive turn when Greek law began to appear in monumental inscriptions, endowing writing with a new social status. Surpassing orality, written laws became visible in public architecture for all literates to read aloud and share with others. However, as with the inscribed monuments of Mesopotamia and Egypt, the primary purpose of the public inscription was to be seen, not necessarily to be read. Presence alone bespoke authority. Of course, before 600 BC very few Greeks could read. Literacy proliferated in the sixth century BC when writing began to be used more widely in public and semi-public life: with the increasing custom of inscribing and displaying public laws, the minting of inscribed coins, the inscribing of black-figure vases and other related innovations.8 Though it has been alleged that, by 500 BC, the majority of Athenians, for example, could read the laws that were posted everywhere in their city,9 it is unlikely this obtained: archaic Greece was not a literate society. Certainly the rules governing Athenian ostracism ­ that is, punishment by temporary exile, voted for with an inscribed ostrakon or potsherd ­ suggest that around 15 per cent of the adult male population of Athens, at least from c. 480 BC onwards, had reached the level of semi-literacy, or perhaps even a slightly higher level, since many of these were clearly able to write competently for themselves. From this, perhaps around five per cent, or slightly more, of the total adult population of Athens, including women and slaves, was literate. In other words, about one out of twenty Athenians could probably `read' with varying levels of competence.
50 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

It was at this time, too, because of reading and writing, that the Greek mythic epic became divided in the public consciousness into the historical narrative on the one hand, and the work of `fiction' (a wholly new concept) on the other.10 Already about 700 BC the poet Hesiod had tried to arrange traditional myths in some sort of rational chronological order, one fitting a new appreciation of space and time and their role in the ordering of human perceptions. By the fifth century BC reading was no longer the monopoly of an oligarchy validating herein its power: it was rapidly becoming a `popular' tool for accessing information. The historian and politician Thucydides (c. 460­395 BC) was even trusting written documents more than oral traditions in compiling a chronology and account of past events, founding in the process the discipline of historiography.11 It signalled a paradigm shift in humanity's appreciation of reading's innate power. For one now realized writing could allow accession and retention of many texts, and to a degree that orality could never achieve. Through reading, a person could visually `become' a text and, with increased reading, even a `walking library' of multiple works. Until the end of the fifth century BC poets remained disciples of the Muses alone. But then the grammatikós or `grammarian' commanded the Greek language, knowing how to read and interpret a written text. It was in the lifetime of the philosopher Plato (c. 427­c. 347 BC) ­ the pupil of Socrates (c. 470­399 BC) and teacher of Aristotle (384­322 BC) ­ that the Greek language advanced to the point where one could begin to address abstract concepts adequately for the first time.12 Plato, well aware of what was taking place in Athenian society, documented these revolutionary changes in his celebrated Phædrus dialogue. This was the fascinating story of young Phædrus, at the end of the fifth century BC, demonstrating to Socrates this new ability of how one `became' a work of written literature. Having memorized a written work by Lycias on the duties of a lover (then a favourite theme), Phædrus wished to impress Socrates with its recitation. But Socrates, mistakenly believing Phædrus had hidden the written text under his robes, requested the youth read him the original instead, remonstrating `I won't let you practise your oratory on me when Lycias himself is here
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 51

present!'13 Lycias's work not only dealt with love, but also with the art of writing, leading Socrates to expound:
You know, Phædrus, that's the strange thing about writing, which makes it truly analogous to painting. The painter's products stand before us as though they were alive: but if you question them, they maintain a most majestic silence. It is the same with written words: they seem to talk to you as though they were intelligent, but if you ask them anything about what they say, from a desire to be instructed, they go on telling you just the same thing for ever. And once a thing is put in writing, the composition, whatever it may be, drifts all over the place, getting into the hands not only of those who understand it, but equally of those who have no business with it; it doesn't know how to address the right people, and not address the wrong. And when it is ill-treated and unfairly abused it always needs its parent to come to its help, being unable to defend or help itself.14

Socrates believed books ­ the objects themselves, not their contents ­ were actually an impediment to learning. There was only one `proper' interpretation of a text, he felt, one shared by those of trained intellect and communicable only by oral transmission. Too much is lost in writing. The voice alone conveys the `one, correct' interpretation. Socrates was demanding from the text the uni-dimensionality of orality that, within the next two generations, the interpretative reader was to transform into multi-dimensionality. Instead of recognizing this revolution in reading, Socrates, insisting on the inherited tradition, simply dismissed all writing. Socrates's position is neither an indictment of reading nor the last stand on the oral society, as some have alleged. It is chiefly a critique on the contemporary inadequacy of Greek writing to reproduce Greek speech, in particular the pitch stress characterizing Greek oratory. Socrates was right: the primitive early writing practices of his era did allow too much ambiguity, hindering communication. Since the beginnings of written speech, readers must interpret, either to retrieve the author's meaning or to understand
52 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

something new. This creative open-endedness simply did not exist in oral society, where meaning was immediate. Socrates wished to maintain the auctorial clarity of orality: it helped to define truth, which was, he insisted, `written on the soul of the hearer to enable him to learn about the right, the beautiful and the good'. One heard the truth; one did not read it. But to maintain orality was to deny reading's potential multi-dimensionality, which was soon to transform all of Western society. Socrates's pupil and biographer Plato endorsed his master's position. Plato rejected written philosophy, even advocating civil legislation to control oral poetry. Yet, as many generations have pointed out, Plato used writing to champion his cause. This has led many to believe that Plato was merely making a hermeneutic or interpretative appeal for writing's `proper' use.15 Plato's many written works attest to a conscious use of the written medium to hone and model thought itself, something quite new in the West: something entirely beyond the capability of oral performance. If Socrates had dwelt wholly in the oral world, his pupil Plato was very much a reader and a writer, despite the public mask. Still, Plato would ban the poet from his ideal republic. This reflected a general distrust of fiction in the West, which lingers still. Fiction is something to be feared, because it represents the unfettered mind, capable of anything. Knowledge is clearly something to be directed for the common good. But fiction, being directionless energy, has always aroused suspicion and invited censure. In actual fact, there were few written texts in Socrates's and Plato's Athens. Writing's full potential as a social tool was yet to be realized. A primitive book trade blossomed in Athens in the fifth century BC. But the private reading of books (papyrus scrolls) seems only to have become relatively `common' in the fourth century BC, the era of Plato's pupil Aristotle, born 15 years after Socrates's death. In contrast to Socrates and his generation, Aristotle became an avid reader. He even amassed a private library that he could use for his scholarship. The fifth to fourth centuries BC marked the transition from the oral to the written tradition (but not the oral to the literate society, the latter being only a very recent phenomenon).
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 53

As Socrates's own pupils Plato and Xenophon used writing to preserve their master's oral teachings ­ including his dismissal of writing ­ so, too, did the new generation of philosophers and physicians, like Hippocrates (c. 460­c. 377 BC), use writing to diffuse new knowledge in a way oral tradition had never done. In time this engendered the creative interpretation of written texts, expanding inherited knowledge's capabilities. The Greek physician, anatomist and physiologist Galen (c. AD 130­c. 200), for example, eventually wrote in turn of Hippocrates: `I shall interpret those observations [of his] which are too obscure, and add others of my own, arrived at by the methods he wrote down.'16 This of course became the very point of reading: to understand, learn from, then build upon a written text. By the fourth century BC, then, reading and writing were beginning to be seen in an entirely new light in the West. The Athenian dramatist Menander (c. 342­c. 292 BC) even maintained: `Those who can read see twice as well'.17 By this time the written word was often perceived to be not only on a par with, but superior to, the spoken word. By the beginning of the fourth century BC, `a certain number of men in Greek cities spent a lot of time with written texts, and many lives were affected by operations carried out in writing'.18 Writing flourished in Hellas chiefly because of papyrus, once the Ptolemies, the Macedonian dynasty that ruled Egypt from the death of Alexander the Great (323 BC) to the death of Cleopatra (30 BC), had taken over Egypt and encouraged trade with the Greek city-states. Until papyrus, great works of literature often survived in a single skin exemplar. Aristotle's works, for example, were stored as scrolls in a cave and would doubtless have been lost forever had they not been purchased by an astute bibliophile who rescued them for posterity. Only after the fourth century BC, once large-scale importation of papyrus was enabled by the Ptolemies in Alexandria, did literature prosper in Greece, allowing many copies of a work, private collections, public libraries ­ indeed, a culture of the written word. The incipient book trade, which had begun in Athens in the fifth century BC, boomed in the third century BC once papyrus became commonly available. In other words, Alexander the Great's take-over of Egypt and imposition of a Macedonian
54 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

Greek administration not only opened up the North African markets to European trade but, because of papyrus, gave rise to the power of the written word and the birth of written culture in the West, with all concomitant repercussions.19 By the end of the fourth century BC, the oral transmission of social knowledge had decisively become a written transmission. What was more, writing no longer merely documented and preserved, but legitimized and validated knowledge. One now composed specifically in order to preserve this poem or that teaching in writing. It achieved greater distribution and ensured authority. Reading was no longer a simple memory aid, but an autonomous channel for information conveyance, interpretation and creation. Greeks did not use writing with the ease and efficiency of the Egyptians, Levantines, Persians and others until the late fourth century BC. Even then (as later with the Romans) oral statements were considered equal to writing in most procedural matters. Whereupon Hellenistic Greeks, especially those ruling in Egypt, elaborated bureaucratic uses of reading and writing that far exceeded what had obtained in earlier centuries.20 The written word held entire states together. Even more importantly, elementary education now empowered society, as at least a few city-states benefited from individual philanthropists financing the attendance of all free boys (and, in some places, free girls) at public schools focusing on reading and writing Greek. Compulsory education for both boys and girls had figured as part of Plato's ideal republic.21 However, the philosopher Theophrastus (c. 372­c. 287 BC) countered that females were to learn only household responsibilities, as higher learning `turns a woman into a quarrelling, lazy gossip'. Although Greek courtesans and many female slaves might well have been literate,22 the typical female patrician, who would have had her female slaves read aloud to her, was not. The archetypal Hellenistic school always instructed far more boys than girls. Pupils began at seven years of age and graduated at fourteen.23 The teaching of reading followed an analytical method, which brought slow progress. First the Greek alphabet was taught, from alpha to omega. Then backwards. Then simultaneously, from both ends: alpha-omega, beta-psi, ending at mu-nu.
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 55

Whereupon more complex syllables were drilled. Then one learnt whole words, of one, then two, then three syllables. Vocabulary followed, including rare words (such as technical and medical terms) selected for their difficulty of reading and pronunciation. After several years, pupils were reading connected texts (first learnt by heart), which were special anthologies of famous passages selected also for their moral content: commonly Homer, Euripides and a few others. As important as reading was recitation, because reading always meant reading aloud. Formal rhetoric comprised an advanced study that built upon reading's foundation. Ancient Greek pedagogy was regimental, harsh and stifling. True inspiration would have lain elsewhere: in a kind tutor's lent scroll, a friend's special papyrus, a respected elder's moving oration. Private tutors instructed the scions of the powerful and wealthy. Through Aristotle's tutelage, for example, Alexander the Great became `a great lover of all kinds of learning and reading', according to his biographer, the Greek philosopher Plutarch (c. AD 46­c. 120).24 Wherever he journeyed, Alexander carried with him the scrolls of Homer's Iliad and Odyssey, and when he died at Babylon in 323 BC he was clutching one of his scrolls of the Iliad (similar to later generations expiring with a copy of the Bible or Qur'a ¯ n in hand). Such anecdotes of the rich and powerful testify to the growing reverence for the written word, which had become something personal and profound. The works of Homer, above all, became `a training ground where one generation of Greeks formed the character of the next until the end of antiquity'.25 (In similar fashion, Virgil's Æneid would, in time, become the same for the Romans.) It is difficult for us today to appreciate the depth of reverence in which Homer's writings, in particular, were held in antiquity. The earliest known public readings took place among the Greeks. Already in the fifth century BC, Herodotus (c. 485­c. 425 BC), the `Father of History', rather than travel from city to city to read his works, as was then customary, presented them to all assembled Greek men at the Olympic festivals. One must appreciate that the first public readings, both in Greece and Rome, still maintained that intimate connection between oral and written literature, in that the authors were presenting their own
56 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

works in a small society where they were also known personally. Each reader-reciter stamped a given interpretation ­ through intonation, tempo, emotion, gesture and other things ­ with a seal of authority as well, robbing the written text at the same time of its wealth of potential meanings. Entertainment, the sight and sound of a text, always dominated public readings. The text's substance was not immediate, the audience generally uncritical of everything but the performer himself: voice, passion, appearance, charisma. It was the world of oratory, of oral performance, with wholly other criteria obtaining than that of `reading' as we know it. It was the author-reader who incarnated the text, who thought for his passive audience. Physicians in antiquity even prescribed reading to their patients as a psychic exercise. This involved, of course, almost exclusively `being read to'. Many Greeks (and later Romans) kept a specially trained slave or freedwoman/freedman whose sole responsibility was to read to them aloud. These would have been particularly schooled in the correct scansion, pronunciation and delivery of both poetry and prose (two separate domains), as these features mattered as much as content. By the third century BC writing assisted every conceivable task in the highly bureaucratic, and thus well-organized and well-regulated, Greek-dominated society of Alexandria: vending beer, keeping a bath-house, accepting a paint job, trading in roasted lentils.26 Within just 33 days, for example, the finance minister Apollonius received 434 rolls of written papyrus to process. It should come as no surprise, then, that precisely where the papyrus trade first empowered the written word the ancient world's greatest shrine to writing rose: the Library of Alexandria.27 It was to become so famous that 150 years after its destruction Athenæus of Naucratis could still write, anticipating his readers' general knowledge: `And concerning the numbers of books, the establishing of libraries, and the collection in the Hall of the Muses, why need I even speak, since they are in all men's memories?'28 The Library of Alexandria was begun under Alexander's successor, the Macedonian Greek ruler Ptolemy I Soter (ruled 323­285 BC), probably as an attachment to the municipal
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 57

museum. At first the papyrus scrolls were simply stored in bookshelves placed in recesses stretching the length of a broad, roofed passageway. Each recess possibly categorized a given class of author, indicated by a clearly marked heading. In turn, each bookshelf would have been categorized into subheadings. The purpose of the Library, the result of Greek culture assimilating Egyptian antiquity, was to encompass the totality of human learning: it would represent the known world's memory. Even Aristotle's own book collection, in time, made it safely to Alexandria. It is alleged that by the reign of Ptolemy III Euergetes (ruled 246-221 BC) no one person could read the complete holdings of the Library. Over a century and a half, the Library's collection expanded to include some 500,000 papyrus scrolls; a further 40,000 were housed in a separate depot attached to the nearby Temple of Serapis. It held the largest physical volume of literature the region had yet seen. How did the Library of Alexandria grow so vast? It enjoyed royal patronage, as an institutionalized national asset. Every ship that put in at Alexandria, one of the world's major ports, had to hand over for copying any scrolls it was carrying. Greek Egypt's ambassadors borrowed scrolls from other Greek libraries for copying. Whole libraries were purchased, others bequeathed. Many Greeks gave scrolls to the Library, while others lent theirs to be copied. Some fraudsters even sold Library officials apocryphal treatises by `Aristotle' (only centuries later proved to be forgeries). One drawback to such a vast collection was that no one could find anything, save through extraordinary memory, for as yet there was no efficient system of book cataloguing. The North African-born Callimachus of Cyrene (c. 305­c. 240 BC), teacher, writer, poet and epigrammatist, finally devised one of the world's earliest known, rational, cataloguing systems here at the Library of Alexandria, where he eventually came to work. An advocate of clear, concise writing, Callimachus, labouring under the Chief Librarian Apollonius of Rhodes (his opposite and adversary), undertook his task using a novel conception: the library as a model of the entire world, as perceived by the Greek scholars of the era.
58 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

Once done, the Library's catalogue alone numbered 120 scrolls (Callimachus did not live to see the completion of his task). The collection was divided into eight sections, according to subject matter: drama, oratory, lyric poetry, legislation, medicine, history, philosophy and `miscellaneous' (significant is the lack of a separate category for theology, the Middle Ages' most important). Long texts were copied in several shorter `books', allowing the reader the ease of individual, smaller papyrus scrolls. Innovatively, books were listed in Greek alphabetical order (alpha, beta, gamma, delta and so forth); although known earlier, alphabetical listing had never been used to catalogue books on such a vast scale. Now, for the first time anywhere, a library was more than a depot of papyrus scrolls: it became a systematized information centre, since access had been acknowledged to be as important as the data themselves ­ indeed, the two in tandem were recognized to be of greatest benefit. In this way the Library of Alexandria became the Mediterranean's premier centre of learning based on the written word. All subsequent libraries were to follow the Alexandrian model. (We still follow the Library of Alexandria today, albeit in an evolved fashion.) At this time an entirely new literary genre appeared that, over the millennia, would conquer the world: the novel. One of the earliest novels to survive in its entirety, probably from the second century AD, begins: `My name is Chariton of Aphrodisias and I am clerk to the lawyer Athenagoras. I'm going to tell you a love story that took place in Syracuse ...'. It was the first great age of love stories, the type of tale that only much later would come to be known as the romance (a word derived from the Old French romanz, meaning `a work composed in the vernacular tongue'). Like so many popular works of today, the ancient Greek novel flaunted adventure and love. A pair of (typically) well-born lovers, suffering separation and misfortune but always trusting in the gods and themselves and preserving their mutual pledges of love, at last find their way back together and live happily ever after.29 Longus's Daphnis and Chloe, for example, probably from the first half of the third century AD, thrilled centuries of readers with its bucolic tale of two young lovers who struggle to realize their true love for one
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 59

another. (Roman patricians loved novels, too, especially in Greek.) The early Greek novels ­ never a greatly popular literary genre, to judge by the few surviving fragments ­ comprised apparently only light reading, primarily for entertainment, with a sophistication of language bespeaking an educated female readership. (Men, on the other hand, appear to have preferred the epic and drama: that is, warfare and heroes.) Such novels lost popularity between the sixth and eighth centuries AD, but Byzantine scholars revived them in the ninth to eleventh centuries ­ greatly influencing, in turn, Arabic, Spanish and then pan-European audiences. Contrary to what some historians have alleged, reading did not give the Greeks democracy, theoretical science or formal logic. That is, reading per se did not change the way people thought. It did, however, encourage more people to write about what they thought. And it provided an opportunity for these and similar predispositions to take root and flourish.30

the jews
Following the lead of the Greeks, the Jews of the Middle East had been among the first to appreciate the manifest benefits of cultural reading, perhaps as early as the seventh century BC. Unlike the Greeks, however, they came to enshrine the very act as something sacred. Babylonians and Assyrians had greatly respected magical texts. But this had been because of these texts' useful instructions for understanding the supernatural and exploiting its forces for personal health, wealth or power. The respect had never entailed veneration of the written word itself, that is, the sanctification of writing and its physical material. The Levantine Jews introduced just such a sanctification, thereby adding a whole new dimension to reading. 31 The written word in fact became fundamental to the Jewish identity. After dedication to God, learning (the reading and interpreting of `sacred' texts) is the Jew's next duty to his faith. (Jewish women were discouraged from, indeed frequently forbidden, reading and writing until only recently.) Reading and
60 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

disputing are held to be the way towards understanding of the divine. The chanted office, one common throughout the ancient Middle East, became a liturgy based entirely on written texts. The very act of reading such texts became part of the holy observance, the direct transmission of the divine covenant. This new concept, born in Hebrew liturgy, eventually inspired Christian Greeks and Romans, whose liturgy spread the practice, as well as the new dimension of the written word, thoughout the Western world. Christianity was founded on, and quickly diffused through, the Judaic exaltation of the written word. By then, reading had transcended even ecclesiastical authority. It had become the Word of God. Best accommodating Hebrew and Aramaic writing's specific Levantine ramification would be the recently proposed dating of the composition of the Biblical account of Israel's `origin and history' to the reign of King Josiah, who ruled from 639 to 609 BC.32 Josiah's court reinstituted the exclusive worship of the god of the Israelites, centred on the Temple of Jerusalem. Josiah's greater goal, however, was to expand his reign over all Judah and the former northern kingdom. Achieving this necessitated the literary creation of a coherent narrative of Israelite history as a clear instrument of God's will. If this explanation is correct, it would mean that the Pentateuch or Torah (the first five books of the Old Testament) and all the historical books of the Hebrew Bible are, in fact, political fiction, composed at a much later date than the events they appear to document. Such stories were meant to furnish Josiah's present and future subjects with a mythical past in order to create a national consciousness of `Jewdom', with its own unique theology. A fully developed national consciousness finally emerged only during the Babylonian Exile (597/586­538 BC) when Aramaic writing was also borrowed to convey the Hebrew language in hitherto unprecedented ways, or even later, during the Hellenistic period (332­63 BC) after the kingdom of Judah had become Judæa. The idea of writing being the `Word of God' had to be a late phenomenon, since Phoenician and Greek bookkeeping and administrative records would have been virtually all that early
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 61

Hebrew scribes had comprehended from the primitive practice. It seems likely that, at least for most of their early history as an incipient `nation', the Jews did not resort to writing at all. Only around the ninth century BC did the first Old Hebrew monumental inscriptions begin to appear, written in Phoenician letters. Whereupon the Jews began using writing with increasing frequency, but for bookkeeping, administration, taxes and the rare monumental and funerary inscription: all the functions of writing known to their contemporaries. But law was never scripture, for Hebrew law was customary law, and this was validated only orally by town elders. In Hebrew, too, as in all languages of antiquity, `to read' (qara' ) was polyvalent, with the additional meanings `to call, call out, recite, proclaim', again emphasizing reading's fundamental sense: `speaking aloud from a written text'. There was no single word like the English `read' that captured the act's uniqueness because, again, this uniqueness would not obtain for many centuries. From scribal accounts to `God-written tablets' embraced not a leap, but a veritable transcendence of human imagination. Yahweh's commandments to the Hebrews to construct the Ark of the Covenant in order to enshrine the miraculously inscribed Tables of the Law occur in Deuteronomy, which was apparently composed in the late seventh century BC when the Jews were creating their identity while collating an entire library of oral traditions that comprised many, often conflicting, genres from several epochs. It is this inspired confusion that informs the Old Testament or Hebrew Bible, revealing many revisions and editions. Most ancient of all are the oral poems. The `Song of Songs', for example, reproduces the typical secular love or erotic song-poem of the late second millennium BC. Of similar antiquity are some historical events, which perhaps had first been written down in the Phoenician (and later in the Old Hebrew) script, in order to record the rise of the early Hebrew monarchy. Many written versions of Hebrew traditions competed with one another: there is evidence of robust literary skirmishes having taken place in antiquity. No writing was yet truly `sacred'. When all temporal power collapsed in the sixth century BC,
62 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

religious power filled the social vacuum, copying the mores, customs, even the script of the dominant Aramaic-speaking Babylonians. It was then, in the Babylonian Exile, that the rites of Jerusalem's cult were written down and the authoritative revisions of the priestly code were undertaken. This continued after the Exile as well until, by the fifth century BC, the Pentateuch or Torah stood in a fairly `authoritative' edition. Immediately predating the Exile, King Josiah appears, then, to have been the initial source of writing's first veneration among the Jews, introducing a new use of traditional writing foremost to acquire greater political control. He enacted legislation attempting to proclaim the Temple of Jerusalem the sole sanctuary of Yahweh. During this same process one of Josiah's secretaries suddenly `discovered' (c. 622 BC) the scrolls of the Book of Deuteronomy inside the Temple, these hitherto unknown scrolls being just that part of the Torah in which the laws defining the Jewish people and their duties and responsibilities are laid down. Here, too, Moses is claimed to have said (IV:2): `Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I command you'. Josiah gathered his subjects together to read this `newly discovered' work aloud, whereupon he convinced them to contract a new covenant with God. This was the beginning of a protracted process that involved sanctifying writing itself, something that had never happened before and only was possible now because of writing's recent commercialization, a more literate public and a new appreciation in the Levant and Ægean of the expanded cultural possibilities of the written word. This very late date of Hebrew consolidation, as recently suggested by `minimalist' scholars, certainly also accommodates most economically the known history of the emergence of a rudimentarily `literate' society in the region. Of course traditional Hebrew history, based on the Torah, would place the veneration of writing in the late second millennium BC, when Moses is alleged to have received on Mount Sinai the Ten Commandments, the miraculously inscribed Tables of the Law (Exodus XIX­XX). This is implausible, however, as the Jews probably did not possess writing this early. It is more reasonable
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 63

to expect such veneration to emerge at the same time that a semi-literate Mediterranean society was appearing. This occurred only around the middle of the first millennium BC. With writing's sanctification, the book also became metaphor. For it was in this momentum of creating a new Jewish history and identity through veneration of the written word that, in 593 BC, just three years after Nebuchadnezzar's first attack on Jerusalem, Ezekiel the Prophet beheld Yahweh mounted on his chariot, instructing him (Ezekiel II:8­10): `"Open thy mouth, and eat that I give thee"./ And when I looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book was therein; / And he spread it before me; and it was written within and without; and there was written therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe.' From a priestly clan, Ezekiel was well familiar with Phoenician and Aramaic literature. Through prophecies often reading like articles of Judaic law, he ultimately described his vision of the Temple of Jerusalem restored and the newly proposed `traditional' faith of monotheism triumphant. In fact, Jerusalem was destroyed seven years later, in 586 BC, whereupon all Jews were exiled to Babylon. After the Exile, having been influenced by cosmopolitan Babylon, the Jews had a new understanding of, and respect for, the written Aramaic word. Scribes suddenly took on a new significance in Jewish society as they redacted older Hebrew traditions and writings in the Aramaic that all Jews now spoke and was becoming the lingua franca of the powerful Persian Empire (550­330 BC). In the synagogues, the scribes began reading and commenting on what was only then becoming the Torah (still only the Pentateuch, the Bible's first five books), later to become the whole body of traditional Jewish teaching. The scribes became the key interpreters of the Law, the editors of the scriptures, commentaries and translations, the very spokesmen of Yahweh. They were also Judaism's prime readers. It was also after their return to Judah from the Babylonian Exile that the Jews constituted the sacred word. It was very much a Hellenistic-influenced process in a region now becoming Judæa, when Greek language, culture and customs came to resonate throughout all aspects of the new faith. The
64 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

traditional names of the `oldest' books of the Torah ­ Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy ­ are mainly of Greek and Latin origin, witnessing their late date of composition or collation. Almost all Jews, however, remained illiterate in antiquity, at least in Hebrew and Aramaic. (For commercial reasons many, however, read and wrote Greek.) For their sacred texts most relied on temple scribes or on their own prodigious memories. Only under the Roman Emperor Vespasian (AD 69­79) was the canon of the Bible, the list of sacred writings recognized as `genuine', finally a closed subject. Shortly afterwards, once Roman Judæa had become Roman Palestine, the Mishnah or approved commentary on the Torah was set down in writing. At that time reading in the main focused on these first five books of the Hebrew Bible. The oral and written commentaries known as the Talmud were written in later varieties of Hebrew (and in Aramaic). In the fourth and fifth centuries AD the Eastern and Western Talmud (the primary source of Jewish religious law, including the Mishnah and the Gemara) were put into authoritative written form, in tandem with the written codification of law that was taking place at the same time throughout the Roman Empire. Talmudists appreciated that the Hebrew Bible encoded a multiplicity of significances, the continuous study of which was the chief purpose of their life. The Midrash, that collation of scholarly essays addressing the holy texts' deeper meaning, alleged that the Torah handed to Moses by God on Mount Sinai was both written and oral at the same time; Moses had studied this during his 40 days alone there, reading the text by day and considering its commentary by night. The ethnic myth rendered the Torah not merely a monolithic perfection (as later mediæval Christians believed of their Biblia Sacra, and Muslims of their Qur'a ¯ n), but also an open-ended revelation: something always to be learnt from as society changed. In other words, a text could be both at once: the original (authoritative) and its interpretation (creative), with the latter endlessly supplementing and perpetuating the former. The concept also became Western Europe's, but this was not until the Renaissance.
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 65

Jewish veneration for the written word was taken to extremes in subsequent centuries. The sixth-century AD Sefer Yezirah ­ Hebrew's earliest extant text of systematic, speculative thought ­ declared, for example, that God had created the world with 32 secret `paths of wisdom' consisting of ten numbers and 22 letters.33 The physical world, time and the human body that comprised the cosmos's three strata were their direct product. All creation could be regarded as a veritable book of numbers and letters. Were we mortals to read the numbers and letters `properly', unlocking their combination in imitation of God, we could similarly give life. Indeed, after studying the Sefer Yezirah the Talmudic scholars Hanani and Hoshaiah were able to create, as one mediæval Jewish legend relates, their weekly dinner of a three-year-old calf!34

romans
Italy's Etruscans, inspired to write their own unique language for the first time using the alphabetic writing of their new neighbours, the colonial Greeks, never developed even a rudimentarily literate society. Instead, they kept their writing restricted mainly to funerary inscriptions, legal contracts, labelling of goods and possibly some administrative and bookkeeping tasks. In the first millennium BC this exceedingly restricted use of writing seems to have characterized all subsequent Etruscan-derived scripts on the Italian peninsula, such as that of the Ligurians, Lepontines, Rhætians, Gallicians, Venetians, Oscans and others. Only one offshoot of the Etruscan script succeeded to greater literacy ­ and eventually to immortality: Latin, as written and spoken by the inhabitants of Rome. The earliest readings in Latin consisted of owners' names on vases and metal objects, some religious dedications and a few short texts. One can assume that Rome's first kings and merchants made frequent use of waxed tablets for correspondence and accounts. Only during the fourth century BC, however, do more substantial inscriptions appear. By then, writing had also become `vital to the effectiveness of Rome's military and
66 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

political power'.35 Writing's functions broadened throughout the era of the Republic. In the late Republic, the use of writing increased exponentially, both in function and in geography, with the Romanization of the provinces that took place in the second and first centuries BC. Some recent historians have claimed that ancient Romans enjoyed `modern' literacy. But this is surely an exaggeration. Certainly, the range of writing in the Roman Empire was very great:
The Romans used written receipts and kept written accounts, wrote up political slogans, organized their armed forces by means of a mass of documentation, kept records of who became a citizen, circulated the texts of magical spells and books advocating religious beliefs, abused each other and protested love to each other in graffiti, wrote letters, and, in great numbers, commemorated the dead.36

Yet Roman society remained fundamentally oral, still perceiving reading to be an adjunct skill, not a primary faculty. Latin likewise possessed no single word that distinguished a unique act. Lego ¯ (`I read') equally embraced `I gather, collect; choose, select; peruse, scan; read out, read aloud, recite'. One could also say e ¯ volvo ¯ (`I read'), which further included the meanings `I unroll, unfold; peruse, study', deriving from the act of unrolling a papyrus scroll. Before 100 BC probably fewer than one out of ten inhabitants of the city of Rome itself could read and write, and throughout the entire Empire fewer than one out of 20 or 30 women. This was not a literate society. The Roman volumen or scroll, like its Greek counterpart, measured about 25 cm in width by six to ten metres in length, and was thus capable of holding relatively long texts. (In general, a volumen held about as much text as one of today's slim paperbacks.) This was the advantage of papyrus, which allowed lengthier works to be put into writing in the first place; until then, skin, wood, wax, pottery, ivory, metal, stone and bark usually permitted only brief inscriptions. Unlike the Greek scroll, however, which commonly descended the length in continuous lines (like today's PC screen), the Roman volumen was inscribed
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 67

perpendicular to the length, so that individual `pages' of writing appeared as one unscrolled. While reading, then, Greeks customarily held their scrolls with one hand over the other, Romans with both hands opposite each other. Each `page' of a volumen (each scrolled-open segment) had two parallel columns of 15 to 30 letters each in 25 to 45 lines, totalling between 750 and 2,700 letters per page.37 (Today's double-spaced typewritten page holds around 1,700 letters.) Typically, lines held a specific number of letters. The earliest papyrus volumina were written in clear, easily legible and even elegant letters for the most part, the size of which matched the scribe's fee. Each line of poetry contained an epic hexameter, iambic trimeter or dramatic declamatory verse, while any given line of prose had up to 30 letters. Such short lines helped the eye to identify the individual words, facilitating comprehension. Until the second or third century AD Latin writers separated words using two or three dots; whereupon scriptura continua (run-together text) became traditional. Though known, punctuation was never granted much importance. Pauses, used principally for oratory, were often merely a blank space in the middle of a line. As mentioned earlier, Greek grammarians had introduced diacritical marks ­ signs placed above or below a letter ­ early on, first to aid pronunciation and accenting (like actors' or newsreaders' cues of today), but then to distinguish whole words, sentences and paragraphs. The basis of all ancient punctuation was rhetoric, not logical analysis. (Today, punctuation is linked mainly to meaning, not to sound, the consequence of oral reading having become silent reading.) Reading a scroll was not a simple matter, for one had to unscroll continuously. Jumping backwards or forwards, or searching for a specific passage, was laborious. There was no table of contents, no index. To close the scroll in order to store it properly, one had to rescroll all the way back to the start. (To leave it open to one segment would invite damage.) And it was an extremely expensive, thus precious object, always demanding safe storage away from children, dogs, rodents, thieves and, above all, rain or spilt wine. If fire broke out in a house, volumina were of course the very first things one grabbed after the children.
68 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

Throughout the Empire, from Caledonia (Scotland) to Cappadocia (eastern Turkey), one read almost the same `hand', proof of an enormous volume of personal correspondence maintaining Empire-wide standards. An immediately recognizable Roman cursive became the common letter-shape. Within a short period only one or two strokes were used to form each letter in rapid succession, indicating very frequent writing. If writing had first served as an instrument of power wielded by a small oligarchy, it became in time, through continuing Roman conquests, commonplace in the administration and daily correspondence of an increasingly vast Empire. Though Cicero (106­43 BC) himself, the Great Orator, deemed that, for human memory, seeing a text was much better than merely hearing it,38 thus acknowledging reading's unique advantage in Rome's oral society, most Romans believed that human speech reigned supreme. Oral statements were equal, if not superior, to writing in most procedural matters. Indeed, the Romans in particular, far more than the Greeks, awarded speech a paramount importance in civic affairs, resembling in this more the northern Germans than their trading partners and subjects in the Levant, above all the Jews.39 Although their most visible reading today might be monumental Latin inscriptions, this self-aggrandizement of temporal authority comprised only a minute fraction of the ancient Romans' reading matter. At least where literature and learning were concerned, Roman reading meant Greek reading and Roman learning meant Greek learning.40 Only in later centuries did Latin authors, above all Virgil, achieve classic veneration. For all Roman pupils, however, learning to read and write almost entirely comprised learning to read and write Greek. Education itself meant Greek education. But unlike Greece, where only a privileged minority took part in a civic life that required a fairly high degree of literacy, Rome, beginning in the late Republic (the second and first centuries BC), had a greater representation of its citizens actively participating in forms of communal life demanding reading: posted texts of proposed laws and names of candidates for office, registers of declarations to the censor, voting-tablets obliging electors to write in a name, and other civic manifestations.
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 69

Rome was run by clerks and upheld by at least a partially literate citizenry. Indeed, it was perhaps the first `Empire of Reading', in that most patricians as well as a large number of freedmen, freedwomen and slaves ­ in Rome, the rest of Romanized Italy and many of the provinces ­ read and wrote on a daily basis. Unlike everywhere else in the world until then, including Greece, writing appeared nearly everywhere in the Empire: on coins, monuments, gravestones, altars at crossroads, boundary stones, aqueduct markers, milestones, not to mention the ubiquitous shop signs, posters, placards (carried on poles during processions) and graffiti. In Pompeii, for example, electoral posters shouted from public walls. (In the subsequent Middle Ages, conversely, such public writing was nearly non-existent.) Most families were their own bookkeepers. And Roman troops `had almost as much red tape as modern armies'.41 This is the lesson to be learnt from Vindolanda, a former Roman military base in northern England along Hadrian's Wall.42 Since 1973 some two thousand letters and documents on wooden tablets have been unearthed there, attesting to writing's pervasiveness in ancient Roman society. Comprising the largest archive of early Roman writings discovered anywhere, the Vindolanda literature dates from between AD 85 and 130. All inscriptions are written in ink or engraved by stylus on wax and convey the thoughts of ordinary men and women corresponding with each other on the base itself and with others far removed. The fact that such a trove, in such an isolated locale, exists at all testifies to the great amount of correspondence that must have been taking place among Romans throughout the Empire. At this time, writing maintained personal contact, ultimately preserving the social network and Roman culture even in primitive foreign parts.43 Such correspondence also secured military supplies and sanctioned orders, as well as conveying essential intelligence. In other words, reading and writing kept the Empire functioning. More recently other Roman sites in Britain ­ Carlisle, Ribchester and Caerleon in Wales, to name only three ­ have revealed similar caches of wooden tablets. It appears that, by the first few centuries AD, most literate Romans read aloud to themselves and wrote their own correspondence, as both the faculty and skill expanded beyond the patrician class
70 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

and milieu. Especially trained slaves and professional scribes and secretaries no longer dominated the ranks of readers. The large demand for papyrus scrolls, and later for parchment volumes, made books merchandise. Greatest in demand were Homer and Virgil, of course. As of the fourth century AD the Bible came to the fore, if at first in only fragmented, `unfinished' form. (A general rule for reading had been laid down in the second century AD whereby the most recent edition of a text was acknowledged to replace the edition before it. Only the most recent edition of a work, in other words, now contained the `authorized' version.)44 Still, even at the height of Rome's passion for written literature, books (scrolls) remained scarce. The imported Egyptian papyrus predominately bore accounts and records, authenticated documents and final drafts of official acts. Only the very wealthy could possess, much less amass, entire papyrus books. Most of Pompeii's and Herculaneum's wealthiest residences, for example, have revealed only a small handful of scrolls. This was because papyrus remained too dear. The marketed books of the Late Republic and High Empire were often shockingly shabby. In truth, only Senators and their wealthy relations could afford proper collectors' quality, and at outrageous prices. The New Testament (Acts XIX:19) chronicles that, at a time when one denarius was the normal day-wage, Ephesus's magic books were worth fifty thousand denarii. In a land where one drachma was worth one denarius, the Greek writer Lucian (c. AD 120­ after 180) mentions one rare book as costing 30,750 drachmas!45 Rome was of course the centre of book publishing, marketing and distributing for the Empire. Cicero's correspondent Atticus, for example, was also Cicero's bookseller; Atticus owned a complement of slaves who principally copied books in Greek for sale. (Occasionally Latin books were also copied.) A corrector, an early incarnation of today's copy editor, would be called upon to revise texts. `Press runs' could be quite large. In the first century AD the exceedingly wealthy, powerful and vain Marcus Regulus Aquilius, on the death of his young son, not only commissioned images of the deceased to be fashioned in paint, wax, silver, gold, ivory and marble, but he publicly read aloud before a large audience a biography of the boy, then had
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 71

scribes complete one thousand copies of this biography to be distributed throughout Italy and the provinces. Whereupon Regulus wrote to local officials to have them select a gifted orator among them to read the work aloud to assembled townspeople ­ which they did.46 Like today, bookshops were `popular' places in Rome, with wooden racks holding the latest editions of papyrus scrolls. Men of letters socialized with booksellers in the evenings and often visited their premises during the day. The booksellers had posters put up announcing new works; flyers were circulated to prominent addresses; sometimes extracts from the works were freely distributed to elicit interest. As provincial Roman settlements became cities in their own right, booksellers set up shop there, too, far from Rome.47 The poet and satirist Horace (65­8 BC), a contemporary of Emperor Augustus, boasted that his Ars poetica was now selling along the Bosphorus, in Spain, Gaul and Africa: truly an `international bestseller'. His contemporary Propertius (c. 50­c. 15 BC), the elegiac poet, was delighted to hear he was being read in northern climes. The Spanish-born epigrammatist and poet Martial (c. AD 40­c. 104) was proud to learn that among his readers were the young people and elderly ladies of Vienne in western central Gaul. His friend Pliny the Younger wrote to their mutual friend Geminus, `That there are booksellers in Lugdunum [Lyon, France] I had no idea, and so learn all the more agreeably from your letter that my books are finding buyers there; I'm pleased their popularity is maintained abroad that they've won in the City [Rome]' (Letters IX:11). Roman schools imitated Greek schools in nearly every way: they were just as regimental, harsh and stifling. Prefiguring what many educators endorse today, the Spanish lawyer and educator Quintilian (c. AD 30­c. 96), who tutored Emperor Domitian's grand-nephews and authored the celebrated Institutio oratoria, encouraged reading to begin as early as possible in a child's life, counselling:
Some hold that boys should not be taught to read till they are seven years old, that being the earliest age at which they can derive profit from instruction and endure the strain of learning. Those however who hold that a child's mind should not
72 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

be allowed to lie fallow for a moment are wiser. Chrysippus [d c. 205 BC], for instance, though he gives the nurses a three years' reign, still holds the formation of the child's mind on the best principles to be a part of their duties. Why, again, since [small] children are capable to moral training, should they not be capable of literary education? 48

Reading circles similar to those in ancient Greece appeared in Rome at the beginning of the second century BC. The earliest known was grouped around the famous general Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus (c. 235­183 BC), who had commanded the Roman invasion of Carthage in the Second Punic War and defeated Hannibal at Zama in North Africa in 202 BC. This circle also welcomed and fostered authors who were not of the patrician class, promoted Greek language and culture, practised frequent and florid correspondence with fellow members and, when they met, sometimes exchanged nugæ or brief poems. Literary groups like these were usually the province of dominant women. At the time of Emperor Augustus in the late first century BC the foremost of these were Precia and Lesbia, who entertained, promoted and fostered up-and-coming authors, `managing' their careers in high society and steering them towards fame and fortune. Again as in Greece, public readings were fashionable throughout the Roman Empire. Augustus himself went to such readings `with both goodwill and patience'.49 Authors presented their latest verses, histories, stories, and their literary friends, fellow scholars or poets, as well as family, clan supporters and the general public would attend to loudly call out approval, clap at regular intervals, and jump up and cheer at particularly stirring passages. Such an audience reaction was not just a kind gesture towards a family member or colleague; it was actually part of the traditional etiquette, and expected. (Indeed, the lack of a demonstrative response by any party could be the cause of grievous umbrage.) All good writers anticipated constructive criticism at a public reading. Hearing this, they would then refine their work to accommodate the public taste. The audience was expected to arrive on time and remain for the entirety of the reading. The decorum was often abused, however, which
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 73

incurred the wrath of such traditionalists as Pliny the Younger. Readings were partly so popular because many of the wealthier patricians, who built auditoriums in their residences specifically for the purpose, believed themselves to be poets and writers of rare talent, worthy of larger audiences than mere banqueters. Nearly all of them performed only their own works while denying others the customary chair on the dais. More important than a work's substance was often the author's skill in oratory, since, like today, entertainment habitually outweighed inspiration. Pliny the Younger, our prime source for such information in the first century AD, praised young Calpurnius Piso, for example, for his superb reading of his Greek `Transpositions among the Constellations':
... a scholarly, illuminating essay. It was written in flowing, tender, smooth, even sublime distichs ... Appropriately and with variation he raised and lowered his tone, alternated lofty with simple, dry with sonorous, sober with jocular, all with equal talent. These were commended by his very pleasing voice, and his voice by his modest personality. His flushed visage clearly showed his excitement, adding special charm to the recitor. Somehow reserve suits literary men better than self-assurance ... After the recitation was over I kissed the young man long and heartily and ­ the sharpest spur of every admonition ­ encouraged him with heartfelt appreciation to carry on as he has begun.50

There were known devices one could employ if uncertain when reading prose but secure in poetry, or uncertain in poetry but secure in prose (both demanding different techniques). As Pliny wrote to the Roman biographer and historian Suetonius when he was planning an informal reading before a few invited friends:
Get me out of this mess! It seems I'm a poor reciter, at least of verses; orations are all right, but so much worse the verses. So I'm thinking of trying out one of my freedmen at the coming recitation among intimate friends. That also suits the intimate circle in that I've selected one who'll be not good but at
74 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

least better than me at reciting as long as he's not self-conscious. He is namely, as reader, just as novice as I as poet. But now I don't know how I should behave while he's reading, whether I should sit there dull and dumb as if the whole business weren't mine, or, as many do, accompany his recitation with whispers, looks and gestures. But I think I'm as ill-suited a pantomimist as I am a reader. I repeat once again: get me out of this mess! And write me forthwith whether it's better to recite poorly than perform these tricks or not. Vale.51

Pliny the Younger also recalled (Letters I:13) how Emperor Claudius had once been walking on the Palatine Hill, heard some noise and asked about its cause; told that Nonianus was giving a public reading, Claudius suddenly and unexpectedly came to listen. But in Pliny's days it seemed only those with too much leisure time on their hands came to readings any longer, and only after several invitations and reminders, while the majority never showed up at all. `I for my part,' he wrote to a friend, `have hardly ever let anyone down. However, these were mostly friends of mine'. The choice of what text to read in public was extremely sensitive, determined by rank, station, influence, political situation, sense of public decency and many other factors. Reading aloud was always a very demonstrative act. The material had to be socially acceptable. The spoken word was still inextricably linked to the literary text. There did not yet exist the independent domain of `silent literature' or `non-oral literature'. This limitation clearly comes across in Martial's mordant epigram:
The verse is mine; but friend, when you declaim it, It seems like yours, so grievously you maim it.52

The distinction also obtained in the celebrated phrase scripta manet, verba volat, which originally meant `writing reposes, speaking soars'. (Only in later centuries did it assume the significance `writing remains, speaking flees', a conceptual reinterpretation.) For in antiquity it was a reader's tacit duty to publicly exalt and demarcate the auctorial argument, not to sow a latently multifarious message. All written literature was
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 75

primarily, though not exclusively, for public sharing, to distinguish and thereby confine a writer's meaning. The `reader' was a transmitter, not a receiver. Public readings usually occupied only a few hours. Some lasted for as long as a week, however, their attendance assured by the fame or power of the author. Pliny the Younger attended one that lasted for three days, but probably only because the author, Sentius Augurinus, had begun by announcing:
I sing songs with short verses As once Catullus and my Calvus did And all those of old. But what is this to me? One Pliny alone is first for me ... How many Catos does it take for one Pliny! 53

Pliny listened `with the greatest pleasure, indeed with admiration ... I do believe that for a number of years nothing more consummate in this fashion has been written'. Such readings often became `examinations' for pretenders and sycophants vying for favour, higher office, a Senate seat or `mass' sales of their most recent poem or history. Readings proliferated in Rome, but not all authors were pleased by this development. Many resented that public readings became the only way to become known. And established writers protested that this profligacy of readings demeaned the custom's edifying function in society. Indeed, Pliny's contemporary Martial was so offended by would-be poets accosting him from all sides that he decried in one of his own poems:
I ask you, who can endure these efforts? You read to me when I'm standing, You read to me when I'm sitting, You read to me when I'm running, You read to me when I'm shitting! 54

How `popular' were writers with the public? Virgil, for one, was given a standing ovation one day when he entered the Roman amphitheatre. Among the graffiti found on the walls of Pompeii are lines recognized to be mutilated from Ovid. There
76 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

was a cultivated public of readers, to be sure, who knew books and read them frequently, despite their cost and rarity. Most reading, including public readings, took place in daylight hours, because of sight problems as prevalent as today's and because of poor illumination in houses, making evening reading difficult. Multiple candles, rush lights and oil lamps furnished enough light to read by, but most of these were far too dear for all but the most affluent households. If one could, one read in direct sunlight: usually in the open atrium or courtyard. Few, however, commanded such leisure at daytime. Poorsighted readers simply had their works of literature or account books read aloud to them by family, friends, employees or slaves. Like the ancient Egyptians and Greeks before them, some hyperopic Romans would surely have used polished stones to magnify the writing, while others simply used drinking glasses filled with water. It had been difficult for the Greeks to read on the kline ¯, the ancient bed. Though also used for leisurely reclining, the kline ¯ made it awkward to unroll a papyrus scroll upward with the right hand while the left arm was propping up the body; actually, no ancient illustrations or sculptures exist showing a person leaning up on a kline ¯ with both hands free, as we read in bed today. The Roman lectus, however, had many variants, one of which was specifically designed for reading and writing by the dim light of the lucubrum, the candle of wax-soaked cloth. In the Satyricon of Petronius (d ad 66), for example, Trimalchio composes on, then reads from, his pile of miniature cushions atop his multi-purpose lectus. Romans read whenever they could, it appears ­ often to the chagrin of their physician: Antyllus (second century AD) warned that people who never learnt verses by heart but resorted to reading them in books occasionally experience painful bowel movements because of excessive perspiration; people with a fine memory for spoken verses, he added, needed only eliminate these noxious fluids through normal breathing.55 The Roman statesman, philosopher and dramatist Seneca (c. 4 BC ­ AD 65), tutor and adviser to Emperor Nero, in whose attempted murder he was implicated, protested at having to study in his loud private lodgings. Martial relates how some went hunting carrying
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 77

along a scroll in a string bag. Horace visited his country house with literature in tow, as did the lyric poet Catullus (c. 84­c. 54 BC) when he frequented Verona. Roman booksellers even made special travelling scrolls since, just like today, many people enjoyed reading while on the move. The scrolls likely held works already committed to memory, however, their perusal allowing one to re-enact the public performance vicariously. Like Greece, the Roman Empire also had its libraries. The first Roman libraries mainly held Greek scrolls, as `proper' reading for any educated Roman was of course Greek, not Latin. Among the celebrated Greek libraries that the Romans had ransacked were the Royal Macedonian Library; the library of Apellicon of Teos (which Cicero later used in Rome); and the library of Mithridates, king of Pontus, who had been defeated by the Roman general Pompey and commited suicide in 63 BC. Many libraries filled private homes. Julius Cæsar's father-inlaw, for one, the powerful Lucius Calpurnius Piso, maintained an enormous library in his luxurious seaside villa at Herculaneum, on the Bay of Naples. Buried by the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79 and rediscovered in 1752, the mainly Greeklanguage library is the largest that has survived from antiquity, having thus far relinquished over 1,800 papyrus scrolls, including hundreds of hitherto lost works of Greek philosophy and a small collection of Roman poetry. Archæologists now suspect that a second library, on a lower level of Piso's multi-terraced villa, awaits imminent discovery. In the first century AD Seneca decried the fad of ostentatiously displaying one's domestic scroll collection: `Many people without a school education use books not as tools for study but as decorations for the dining room!'56 He further railed against the scroll collector `who gets his pleasure from bindings and labels'. In the households of these collectors, he fumed, `you can see the complete works of orators and historians on shelves up to the ceiling, because, like bathrooms, a library has become an essential ornament of a rich house'. The inflated Trimalchio in Petronius's Satyricon even boasts that he has `two libraries' ­ one Greek and one Latin! Already by the time of the historian Tacitus (c. AD 56­c. 120) many readers no longer sought the eloquence of a Livy or
78 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

Cicero, in which public oratory thrived, but the terseness, brevity and matter-of-factness of the scholar accustomed more to the study than the dais. Still, the new style exploited the techniques of skilled oration, revising them for a targeted audience of like-minded scholars. This produced a division among Roman readers. There were those among the élite who particularly enjoyed and encouraged this new brevity of style. Then there was the large majority of readers who preferred conventional rhetoric and bought those popular genres that used and perpetuated it. Some country houses in the fifth century AD held Latin classics for the men and devotional works for the women. The gender distinction is significant. Women were lauded as bibliophiles only rarely. One of the most celebrated was Melania the Younger (c. AD 385­439), who lived in Rome and North Africa and died in Bethlehem. St Augustine (AD 354-430) dedicated one of his works to her grandmother, also named Melania (c. AD 342­c. 410), whom he also praised in one of his letters as a formidable scribe, hinting at her writing talent. The Roman scholar Gerontius, too, recalled with relish how Melania the Younger `would go through the Lives of the [Church] Fathers as if she were reading desert'. Indeed, he praised her passion for reading:
She read books that were bought, as well as books she chanced upon with such diligence that no word or thought remained unknown to her. So overwhelming was her love of learning, that when she read in Latin, it seemed to everyone that she did not know Greek and, on the other hand, when she read in Greek, it was thought that she did not know Latin.57

Among the most highly valued books of antiquity were the three Greek books of the Sibylline Prophecies. These lay stored in a chest in a stone vault underneath Rome's Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus. Oracular women who divined in riddles, the ten sibyls ­ from Cumæ, Cyme, Delphi, Erythrea, the Hellespont, Libya, Persia, Phrygia, Samos and Tibur ­ were `immortals' whose words, the Greeks and Romans believed, held profound significance for mortals. Originally, nine scrolls of prophecies
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 79

had existed. The Sibyl of Cumæ had offered these to the seventh and last legendary king of Rome, Tarquinius Priscus (616­579 BC). Twice Tarquinius refused to purchase them, and so twice the Sibyl burnt three scrolls. In the end Tarquinius bought the last three for the price of all nine. These were then held in Rome for centuries as `sacred texts', as with the Jews' recently created `ancient' writings in Judah, but with the important difference that the Sibylline Prophecies were inaccessible, being too sacred to display. Just like ancient Egypt's tomb texts they were, in fact, writings without readers. But this was just the purpose. Their inaccessibility imbued their owners, the ruling élite, with the nimbus of prophecy, reinforcing their power base. The last three scrolls were lost in a conflagration in 83 BC. (Twelve texts believed to be Sibylline Prophecies were discovered in Byzantium many centuries later, then collated in one parchment manuscript published, incompletely, in 1545.) Romans also knew divinations by text, whereby a reader would transform the written word into something neither the author nor society at large saw in it. The text became a private code, in other words, the secret symbol of a binary fortune: boding ill or good, depending on the reader's interpretation, needs or mood. This type of `reading' was exceptionally popular in antiquity. It was reading not for information, erudition, enlightenment or entertainment, but for fortune-telling. A surprisingly strong belief in divining by text obtained in antiquity. Indeed, some believed reading's primary function lay in just such magic. Cicero accused the augur (a religious official who observed and interpreted omens and signs) Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus of having caused in 162 BC `the resignation of the consuls at whose election he had presided in the previous year, basing his decision on a fault in the auspices [auguries from birds], of which he became aware "when reading the books"'.58 In post-Republic Rome readers preferred to use Virgil's poems to tell the future, randomly consulting those scrolls of Virgil's works available at temples dedicated to the goddess Fortuna. This practice, known as the sortes Vergilianæ, was first described when young Hadrian, desirous to learn Emperor Trajan's opinion of him, opened Virgil's Æneid at random to read that Æneas saw `the Roman king whose laws
80 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

shall establish Rome anew'. Hadrian took this to be a positive sign, and acted accordingly. But the Roman Empire never enjoyed such a thing as `popular literature', works personally read by tens or hundreds of thousands. One must even admit that antiquity's two favourites, Homer and Virgil, were almost exclusively learnt through dictation and recitation, not through personal reading. And those monumental Roman funerary inscriptions one still finds from the British Isles to the Middle East? Few such inscriptions were ever truly read by anyone; they were seen instead, helping surviving family members `to maintain or claim a certain rank or respectability'.59 The family members themselves need not have been fully literate. Particularly in later centuries, most were not. Mastery of the written word never had greater regard than among Rome's later emperors, who bestowed on learned teachers the highest authority. This was purposely done to uphold, in the face of barbarian incursions, the literate culture that Rome itself had come to represent, though not encompass. Valentinian I (AD 321­75), for example, emperor of the Western Roman Empire, engaged the Bordeaux-born poet and rhetorician Decimus Magnus Ausonius (died c. AD 393) as tutor to his son Gratian (359­83) who, in turn, once he became emperor, appointed Ausonius to be a Prætorian Prefect or chief magistrate. By then, civil administration was firmly founded on reading and writing. Greek law had furnished authentication of contracts by initially noting them on rolls, then by publishing them in official bureaus for all literate persons to read. About 500 years later Rome achieved something similar with professional scriveners or notaries who, over the succeeding three centuries, came under the supervision of public authorities. Once written contracts became common in the Roman Empire, however, Goths and other Germanic tribes invaded. Yet the system that had been set up functioned so well that the new overlords borrowed and used it, too. (In fact, this became the basis of the mediæval notarial system, which accounted for the greatest frequency of reading and writing in the Middle Ages.) The custom of publicly reading secular works ceased in the sixth century. This had various causes: the patricians vacating large centres, declining education, a weakening book trade,
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 81

Germanic incursions and other changes.60 The vernacularization or `fragmenting' of the Latin tongue was a chief cause. The Christian poet Sidonius Apollinaris (c. AD 433­79), Bishop of Clermont, who gave one of the last known descriptions of a public reading in Rome, complained of Latin having become solely `the language of the [Christian] liturgy, of the chancellaries and of a few scholars'.61 Greek readings were long gone. Public Latin readings endured only in the divine office of the Christian Church. But by then Patristic Latin ­ the Church's adopted written tongue ­ was becoming increasingly unintelligible to most Christians. It had to be interpreted by specially ordained readers who, in time, became a separate caste: the presbyter or `priest'. Yet by the eighth century even many of these presbyters no longer understood the Latin Bible, prayers or hymns they recited at the divine office.

late antiquity and early christianity
Clay tablets could fit in one's palm. Papyrus sheets could be joined to fashion portable scrolls. Both materials served readers well for thousands of years ­ almost perfectly suited, in fact, to their respective society's needs. Then something revolutionary occurred, prompted by a new need. Pliny the Elder (AD 23­79) tells how Eumenes II (ruled 197­158 BC) of Greek Pergamum in Asia Minor, wishing to establish a library to rival the Library of Alexandria, ordered a shipment of papyrus from the Nile.62 But King Ptolemy of Egypt forbade its export, desirous to ensure the Library of Alexandria's pre-eminence as the world's repository of knowledge. Forced to find an alternative, Eumenes ordered his experts to create a new writing material, then, for his library. Whereupon these Eastern Greeks soon perfected a technique of thinly stretching and drying the skin of sheep and goats. The final product of this process eventually became the primary vehicle of a new world faith and the medium of an entire epoch ­ parchment. As early as the first century BC Julius Cæsar had folded a papyrus sheet into individual `pages' for dispatches to his troops in the field. This practice eventually created the codex, a text of
82 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

pages written on both sides for turning, not scrolling. This appeared for the first time near the end of the first century AD, in Rome, its innovator unknown. The first to mention the codex, Martial praises its compactness and points out how it relieves library space. He also mentions its usefulness on a journey for, unlike a scroll, it can be read in one hand:
Homer on parchment pages! The Iliad and all the adventures Of Ulysses, foe of Priam's kingdom, All locked within a piece of skin Folded into several little sheets! 63

The earliest known complete codex or bound volume, discovered in the mid-1980s in the ruins of a fourth-century house at the Dakhleh Oasis in the Sahara, is an estate steward's fouryear record of financial transactions.64 Written in Greek, it comprises eight leaves with four holes (two above and two below) on the left side for the binding cords. Eminently practicable, it clearly served the steward as a durable and portable `pocketbook'. One can assume it typifies the codex format of the first few centuries AD. At first the codex, still of papyrus, was merely a novelty, an object of curiosity. Traditional works were of course expected to be on scrolls. But as parchment gained in popularity, especially when Christians favoured texts on parchment and physicians preferred the codex format because of easier referencing, the codex of bound pages became more fashionable.65 The earliest Greek codex on vellum (fine parchment prepared from the skin of a calf, kid or lamb) is a copy of Homer's Iliad from the third century AD, now in Milan's Biblioteca Ambrosiana; the Iliad could now fit in one parchment codex, rather than in 24 separate papyrus scrolls. As of the first century BC thousands of similar codices would have appeared. Perfectly suiting the codex format, parchment was not only much cheaper than papyrus, but also far more durable and resistant to insects and humidity. Even parchment, however, was too dear for most common purposes, and so the largest part of reading and writing still took
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 83

place on waxed tablets; nearly all correspondence and daily minutiæ were recorded and read on these easily erasable surfaces. Yet more and more parchment sheets were being bound together and sold to allow one to make notes or record sums in primitive notebooks or ledgers. By the third century AD such notebooks were sporting elaborate covers, even of decorated ivory, and were presented to officials on nomination to public office. As especially refined gifts of sophistication, they often included a personal dedication or even a poem inside to mark a special occasion. Makers of papyrus scrolls began favouring these notebooks pre-written with particularly popular poems or small collections of writings, to be presented, much like today's commercial card industry, more for the gesture than the text. In time the bound parchment codices became increasingly popular, and considerable commercial gain could be made from them. Soon the parchment format was rivalling the papyrus scroll for its relative lack of expense, ease of production, greater return on investment, compactness and utility of reading. Parchment had begun seriously competing with papyrus during the first century AD, but by the fourth century had almost wholly replaced it.66 (Papyrus's complete replacement finally occurred in the early Middle Ages, when the trade routes to Egypt were disrupted by the Muslim expansion, halting the export of papyrus.) But parchment was far from the perfect writing material. It, too, was expensive, requiring the skins of costly sheep, lambs, goats and calves. After the fourth century AD the parchment codex ­ or `book' as it came to be called in English (a derivative of Germanic bo ¯ka ¯ or `beech', after the earliest material of rune tablets) ­ remained Europe's preferred literary form. Throughout the Age of Parchment, as the Middle Ages is frequently called, parchment sufficed as a writing material, however, only because demand for writing remained low. (Once the printing press occasioned enormous production runs a thousand years later, expensive parchment was replaced by cheaper paper.) The earliest vellum books were usually of a broad quarto size, a parchment sheet folded twice into four leaves, or eight pages. Its name, quaternio, later inspired our English word
84 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

`quire'. The quire format remained a favourite throughout the Middle Ages. When putting together the quire sheets, book producers normally took care to lay them in such a way that hair-side faced hair-side and flesh-side faced flesh-side, as the two sides of parchment can differ greatly. In this way, two pages of uniform appearance met the eye: either yellow-yellow (hairside) or light-light (flesh-side). Greek books usually began with the lighter flesh-side, Latin with the yellower hair-side.67 Ever increasing use of parchment accompanied Christianity's growth: the first copies of the Bible were vellum codices, a practice that became traditional. Christianity secured the triumph of the parchment codex, indeed created the modern book. A relative late-comer, Christian reading was a direct, hybrid descendant of the Greek, Hebrew and Latin traditions described above. The most ubiquitous book in world history, translated into more languages than any other, the Christian Bible consists of the 39 books of the Old Testament (originally in Hebrew) and 27 books of the New Testament (Greek); the Apocrypha, a collection of other early Christian writings, also survived in Hebrew and Greek. (The status of the Apocrypha has been controversial since the Reformation, when the Vulgate was translated into vernacular languages.) The Vulgate, the Latin translation of the Bible from the original Hebrew and Greek, informed the Roman Catholic tradition of the Middle Ages. As early as the fifth century AD, enormous Bibles and other sacred books ­ missals (prayers, rites and so forth of the Mass for a complete year), chorales (metrical hymns sung in unison) and antiphonaries (a bound collection of psalms, hymns and the like, chanted or sung in alternate parts) ­ were displayed on a church's lectern for several readers standing at a distance. Some were so large that lecterns had to be fitted with rollers. The purpose was loud communal reading, especially for choirs, to include as many readers as possible in the celebration of the Mass. (This practice of enormous books with large lettering for choral celebration has continued in the Catholic church up to the present day.) Here, the reader submerses herself or himself in the communal persona, whereby the act of reading becomes group ritual. It is wholly different from the silent, private,
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 85

intimate reading of the later Books of Hours (as of the twelfth century AD). The parchment codex not only allowed Homer in one handy volume. It expanded the auctorial potential far beyond anything the clay tablet or papyrus scroll could encompass. Now the authors of late antiquity, such as Augustine with his City of God and Confessions, or Isidore of Seville (c. AD 560­636) with his Etymologiæ, could undertake a voluminous work knowing it would be contained under one cover, that is, received and understood as a greater intrinsic unity. The new format determined the nature of creative writing itself, in other words, opening up a new dimension of cultural expression in the West. Not being a scroll, the codex could allow easy access to any part of the text for referencing. It also held four margins (top, bottom, left, right), which the reader could fill with glosses, annotations and commentaries, bringing the reader into the written material. The codex's format also prompted innovations in organizing literature: chapters now accommodated subdivisions of a work, and collations called anthologies held several works under one cover. The whole work was one compact body of information, no longer a sequential stringing-out of connected scrolls. A reader now held an immediately accessible entirety. This altered perception of literature has since prevailed. (Only now is `scrolling' returning, in descending Greek fashion, as the computer screen alters modern reading perceptions.) By the close of the fourth century AD the written word's prestige overshadowed oral soothsaying and oracular pronouncements. One now divined using both Virgil and the Bible, the latter practice eventually becoming `gospel cleromancy', still observed in some places today. Patricians continued to collect books to impress, a characteristic foible that had Ausonius mocking:
You've bought books and filled shelves, O Lover of the Muses. Does that mean you're a scholar now? If you buy string instruments, plectrum and lyre today: Do you think that by tomorrow the realm of music will be yours? 68
86 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

Even the Germanic `barbarians' were turning to reading and writing. Using the fourth-century AD Greek alphabet, Bishop Wulfila (c. AD 311­83) created `Gothic letters' in order to translate the Bible into his Visigothic language. Other Goths adapted Wulfila's script and wrote religious and other texts, such as deeds (actae), until the eighth century. Only a small number of Goths, however, ever read, these being chiefly churchmen. Reading never permeated Gothic society. Reading actually declined throughout the Roman Empire in every social domain but religious practice. Christianity chiefly succeeded because, being parasitic to Greco-Latin learning, it claimed literature as its own vehicle and thus appealed to the schooled literate. The Church Fathers of the first few centuries AD were all trained in rhetoric; they commanded the classics, then used their literary knowledge to persuade, convince and convert in service of the Church. Plato and the Stoics (who taught that submission to destiny and to natural law brought virtue and happiness) provided the most useful concepts and arguments for these men of learning who accomplished Christianity's `triumph' over paganism in the fourth century AD when Christianity became the official religion of the Roman Empire. Fundamental to Christianity ­ a faith of reading ­ was the body of writing later called the New Testament. The earliest dated `book' of the New Testament is Paul's letter to the Thessalonians, from AD 50. About four to seven years later, the First Letter to the Corinthians followed, at which time, during Emperor Nero's reign (AD 54­68), Christianity was already being practised as a faith in small cells throughout the Mediterranean. One century later, the Greek Irenæus, Bishop of Lyon, wrote of the composition of the four Gospels (Matthew, Mark, Luke, John):
Thus Matthew published among the Hebrews and in their own language [i.e. Aramaic] a written form of Gospel in the epoch in which Peter and Paul were evangelizing Rome and founding the church there. After their death Mark, the disciple and interpreter of Peter, also transmitted to us in writing what Peter preached. Luke, the companion of Paul,
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 87

consigned in a book the Gospel that the latter preached. Then John, the disciple of the Lord, the very one who had rested on his bosom, also published the Gospel while he was sojourning in Ephesus in Asia.69

Within a span of around 30 years, then, it appears the oral traditions surrounding the life and teachings of Jesus, and the subsequent activities of his disciples and other followers, became a codified collection of texts circulated among the cells of believers to spread the faith through reading and writing. Yet much more remained oral, and was never written down. That the Gospels comprised only a fragment of the much larger oral literature circulating about Jesus was affirmed by John: `And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written' (John XXI:25). There was no need to write them down, for the target audience required quality, not quantity: the essence of the faith, to inspire and convert. In this tone, and with this editing in mind, the New Testament was collated. True `Scripture' remained, for all early Christians, the Old Testament. The veneration of the New Testament, still awaiting sacred status, would come only much later. Even the first Christians practised censorship. When Paul came to Ephesus and preached there for more than two years, the Jews and Greeks were enthused, especially by Paul's healings, and eventually `Many of them also which used curious arts brought their books together, and burned them before all men: and they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver. So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed' (Acts XIX:19-20). A fortune in rare books (since one piece of silver was a day's wage) was burnt on account of religious conviction as a public show of faith: one burnt the book, the pagan belief, as one would burn an enemy, to destroy the competition and erase its knowledge from memory. In time, the Romans turned censorship against the Christians. Yet once Christianity became the state religion, Emperor Constantine, after the Council of Nicæa's condemnation of Arius and his doctrine in AD 325, ordered in turn that all of the Arian sect's books be burnt.
88 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

Reversing Greco-Roman tradition, early Christians handed the book to God the Father, God the Son and the holy saints. Even the writings of Paul were regarded as authority, able to stand in court in good stead. When the Governor of Roman Africa was trying some Christians, for example, he asked what they had to defend themselves. `Texts by Paul', they replied, `a just man'.70 That the `impediment to learning', writing, could have replaced legal rhetoric itself, would have astounded Socrates. The Church Fathers were insatiable readers and prolific writers. St Epiphanius (d AD 403) ascribed two thousand original titles to Origen of Alexandria (c. AD 185­c. 254), while St Jerome listed Epiphanius' own 800 titles. Wealthy benefactors endowed these super-scholars with a guaranteed income, residence and small army of secretaries and scribes. Their rapid dictations were legendary. For example, St Jerome was said to have translated the Book of Tobit in one day and the Book of Esther in one night. One of the greatest influences on the written word in the West was St Augustine of Hippo. An impassioned reader as a young man, he was amazed at the mnemonic abilities of a schoolmate who was capable of quoting the penultimate verse of each book of Virgil `quickly, in order and from memory ... If we then asked him to recite the verse before each of those, he did. And we believed that he could recite Virgil backwards ... If we wanted even prose passages from whatever Cicero oration he had committed to memory, that also he could do.' Indeed, Augustine claimed, borrowing a favourite phrase from Cicero, this young scholar was capable of impressing a read text `on the wax tablets of memory'.71 Augustine held that letters of the alphabet were `signs of sounds' that also were `signs of things we think'. For him, such letters had been `invented so that we might be able to converse even with the absent'.72 Reading was thus a conversation with the absent, hearing the spoken word of someone who was not present. Hearing is the pivotal concept here. For with Augustine we first encounter a clear distinction between loud reading and silent reading: between the written word as the human voice and the written word as its own medium. When thirty years of age, in AD 384, Augustine came upon his teacher St Ambrose (c. 340­97), Bishop of Milan, silently reading to himself:
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 89

... when he was reading, he drew his eyes along over the leaves, and his heart searched into the sense, but his voice and tongue were silent. Oft-times when we were present ... we still saw him reading to himself, and never otherwise ... But with what intent soever he did it, that man certainly had a good meaning in it.73

It appears that silent reading was something surprisingly rare at the time, otherwise Augustine would never have made such a comment. Some scholars hold that `ancient books were normally read aloud, but there is nothing to show that silent reading of books was anything extraordinary'.74 However, only a handful of passages in antiquity attest to silent reading.75 For example, in Euripides' Hippolytus (fifth century BC) Theseus silently reads a letter his dead wife is holding. In Aristophanes' The Knights (fifth century BC) Demosthenes wordlessly regards a writing tablet that an oracle had sent, and shows surprise at its contents. Plutarch describes in his Parallel Lives how, in the fourth century BC, Alexander the Great silently reads a letter from his mother while his troops, watching, were amazed by the ability. In his Moralia, Plutarch further writes of Alexander breaking the seal of a confidential letter from his mother and beginning silently to read to himself, whereupon his bosom friend Hephæstion comes up to silently read the letter alongside.76 Plutarch records, too, how Julius Cæsar, alongside his rival Cato in the Senate in 63 BC, mutely read a short love letter from Cato's sister.77 (Here, the ostentatious act of silent reading, which was Cæsar's ruse, aroused Cato's suspicion, who announced a conspiracy; Cæsar was `compelled', then, to reveal the love letter from Cato's sister, doubly humiliating his rival ­ Cæsar's intention all along.) Providing consolation to the deaf in one of his essays, Cæsar's contemporary Cicero offered the advice: `If they happen to enjoy recitations, they should first remember that before poems were invented, many wise men lived happily; and second, that much greater pleasure can be had in reading these poems than in hearing them'.78 In the second century AD, the Greek astronomer, mathematician and geographer Ptolemy
90 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

noted that people occasionally read silently to themselves when concentrating on a subject, as giving voice to the words distracted from thought.79 In a lecture perhaps delivered during Lent in AD 349, St Cyril of Jerusalem (c. 315­86) appealed to his women parishioners, while they were waiting during the ceremonies, to read `quietly, however, so that, while their lips speak, no other ears may hear what they say'.80 The passage is remarkable in three ways. First, it describes a silent mouthing of written language; even today, when reading difficult material, people often move their lips, as if the phonology were needed in order to assist comprehension. In the fourth century such mute mouthing may have been needed to parse, or segment, the run-together words on the page. (Regular word separation did not become common again until the ninth century AD; shortly after this silent reading became common, chiefly prompted by regular word separation.) Second, each woman parishioner is able to read, revealing a surprising degree of literacy among Jerusalem's Christian females. And third, each appears to possess a prayer book or hymnal: it was a rich parish indeed that could afford private books. Augustine speculated about Ambrose's silent reading: `Perhaps he was afraid that if he read out loud, a difficult passage by the author he was reading would raise a question in the mind of an attentive listener, and he would then have to explain what it meant or even argue about some of the more abstruse points'.81 In other words, silent reading protected Ambrose from interruption, thus permitting a one-to-one, more profound relationship with the written text. Augustine's speculation suggests his own intimate appreciation of reading's individualistic potential, one that would only become universal during the Middle Ages. Augustine himself, despite his surprise at his teacher's ability, read silently on occasion. At a moment of great personal turmoil, Augustine, who had been reading aloud Paul's Epistles to his friend Alypius in Augustine's summer garden but had walked away to weep alone, overheard a child chanting the refrain tolle, lege (`take up and read').82 Inspired, Augustine returned to Alypius to seize the book and wordlessly read to himself ­ and
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 91

`the darkness of doubt' was dispelled. When Alypius asked what had moved him, Augustine, who had closed the book on one finger, opened the text and Alypius read, aloud this time, not Augustine's passage but one further along that moved Alypius equally strongly. Augustine loved Latin, his native tongue, but resented Greek. Because of Augustine's influence on Christianity, his was the major contribution in the shift from Greek to Latin reading in the West, setting the foundation for what has been labelled the `Latin Middle Ages'. Of course Greek continued to thrive after Augustine, mainly for the Byzantine Empire and its impact on Arab scholarship. But Greek was to remain, at least in Western Europe, secondary to Latin forever after. Christianity's earliest known library appeared in Rome's church of S Lorenzo, founded by Pope Damasus I some time in the 380s. It housed the various books of the Bible, biblical commentaries, works of the Greek apologists (who defended by written argument the Christian faith against Rome's earlier belief system), as well as a selection of Greek and Latin classics. The position of pre-Christian literature in the early Church was often simply a matter of taste. Sidonius even chided a friend for having separated his library into classical and Christian authors, the former next to the gentlemen's seats, the latter next to the ladies' seats!83 Most early Church Fathers found Greek and Latin classics to be eminently readable, as their works seemed to prefigure Christian teachings. Indeed, in his De doctrina christiana Augustine claimed authors like Aristotle and Virgil had `unjustly possessed the truth'. The entire legacy of classical antiquity was now borne by the new Christian Church. As of the fifth century AD this was becoming missionary and monastic. Reading featured prominently, as each Christian monk was to devote many hours a day, if possible, to reading Scripture. Instrumental in the emergent institutionalization of reading was St Benedict of Nursia (c. 480­c. 547), who founded a monastery at Monte Cassino (c. 529), on a hill between Naples and Rome. Among the many rules that Benedict laid down for his `Benedictines' to follow ­ the written code meant to preclude the pre-eminence of any abbot ­ was this addressing reading:
92 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

At the meal time of the brothers, there should always be reading; no one may dare to take up the book at random and begin to read there; but he who is about to read for the whole week shall begin his duties on Sunday. And, entering upon his office after Mass and Communion, he shall ask all to pray for him, that God may avert from him the spirit of elation. And this verse shall be said in the oratory three times by all, he however beginning it: `O Lord, open Thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth Thy praise'. And thus, having received the benediction, he shall enter upon his duties as reader. And there shall be the greatest silence at table, so that no whispering or any voice save the reader's may be heard. And whatever is needed, in the way of food, the brethren should pass to each other in turn, so that no one need ask for anything.84

Benedict's Regula monachorum was to become the model Rule of all monastic orders in Western Christendom. Benedict stipulated three hours of daily reading in summer, two in winter. During Lent, the 40 weekdays commemorating Jesus's fasting in the wilderness, each monk was to read one complete volume. On any journey, a monk was to carry along a small book. And during all meals and before compline (the last of the seven canonical hours, just before retiring) monks were of course to be read to: a rhythmical, chant-like style of reading intended to exercise the mind and to commit holy texts to memory. Benedict also instructed his monks to hold, if possible, the books they were reading `in their left hands, wrapped in the sleeve of their tunics, and resting on their knees; their right hands shall be uncovered with which to grip and turn the pages'. Benedict's reading at Monte Cassino, and at all subsequent foundations that followed his Rule, reversed the customary practices of secular reading. This was special reading, in that it comprised limited titles and addressed a unique, confined audience. It was exclusively sacred, authoritative and involuntary, whereby emotions and critical faculties were banned. Some of it was private and silent: tacite legere or legere sibi, to use Benedict's own phrases. Most was public and loud, however: not to learn
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 93

and grow, nor even to be entertained, but to lose oneself in the common indoctrination. It was not individual liberation, but communal submersion, not unlike the text-read megaphone indoctrination of twentieth-century labour camps. It is not surprising, then, to find the repeated mastication of divine fare as a frequent metaphor in Christian writings of the era.85 The Roman statesman Cassiodorus (c. 490­c. 585) retired in his early sixties to found a monastery at Vivarium in Calabria, where, unlike Benedict, he encouraged fellow monks to read both the classics and sacred writings. Still, he emphasized the classics should be read only as a means to better understand the Bible and Church Fathers. Towards this end Cassiodorus had books imported from North Africa, then a great centre of the early Church, which he stored at his monastery in nine large cabinets.86 Pictures, too, were often `read' as symbols in antiquity and early Christianity. The picture of a deity's attribute would stand for the deity herself or himself. In this way, the hearth was Vesta, the herald's staff and winged travelling-cap were Mercury, the lightning bolt was Jupiter, and so forth. Animals could also become a god's symbol, such as the eagle for Jupiter. Scenes from literature adorned wealthy patricians' walls, reminding them of favourite passages from, most commonly, Homer and Virgil. Through such scenes, the non-reader ­ a learned listener who was often as versed as any literate ­ would recall line and verse the moment the eye took it in. This, too, was a frequent form of `reading', as it evoked the spoken language, though not through written symbols. In the first or second century AD scenes depicting episodes in Jesus's life were doubtless adorning early Christians' walls, too. The early Church also adopted Roman iconographic practices, using symbols for attributes, such as the Evangelists John, Mark and Luke as the eagle, lion and bull, respectively, or the dove for the Holy Spirit and the lamb for Christ. The substitutions later took on individual qualities: the lamb was no longer only Christ, but Christ's sacrificial quality; the dove was no longer only the Holy Spirit, but the quality of eternal redemption.87 The images swelled with the centuries, so that a vast `lexicon' of Christian concepts was expressed through
94 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

them. The Old Testament could thus be related and linked to the New Testament, continuing the policy of spiritual continuity the early Church had followed textually. As St Augustine had affirmed: `The New Testament lies hidden in the Old, while the Old is disclosed in the New'. One of the earliest examples of Christian iconography linking Old and New Testament scenes to be `read' simultaneously appears on two door panels in the church of S Sabina, Rome, carved c. 430. Anyone familiar with the Bible would immediately recognize here the miracles of Christ opposite those of Moses. Those not familiar would either have to invent a story or ask someone what it told. Over the centuries curiosity won countless converts. For this reason, when asked for advice about decorating a church St Nilus of Ancyra (d c. AD 430) suggested Bible scenes on either side of the Holy Cross, which would `serve as books for the unlearned, teach them scriptural history and impress on them the record of God's mercies'.88 The practice has continued up to the present day. Written culture in antiquity was generally restricted to a small number of privileged persons. None the less, in cities with large populations (such as Rome, with around half a million inhabitants) there were thousands who read, wrote, listened and actively participated in and benefited from written language. Throughout antiquity, reading and writing coexisted with all aspects of traditional oral culture. Those who could read and write widened pre-existent class differences, as they also participated in and contributed to civic management, military command and expansion of empire. After Greece's and Rome's archaic periods, the privileged class came to depend on reading and writing. Everyone else in society surely felt their effect. Yet the oral dictate so prevailed that reading was universally perceived as nothing more than written speech, a sophisticated form of hearing. Reading's true potential mostly lay unrecognized. Human memory was more actively cultivated and relied on. And it was extremely expensive to own books in antiquity ­ and difficult, too, if one did not live in a metropolis. Even fully literate Greeks and Romans seldom owned papyrus scrolls or parchment codices, and thus only
t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 95

infrequently arrived at, through personal reading, a knowledge of the greater world or innovative thought. Nearly all literate Greeks and Romans used their ability to read and write to keep accounts, follow local elections, carry on correspondence and a number of other things that only rarely included literature. Because of these circumstances, one certainly cannot speak of mass literacy in antiquity. The literate society still lay nearly two thousand years distant. Still, many acknowledged literacy's primacy. A contemporary of Emperor Augustus, the Greek historian Diodorus Siculus, for one, had to confess that
it is by means of [literacy] that the most important and the most useful of life's business is completed ­ votes, letters, testaments, laws, and everything else which puts life on the right track. For who could compose a worthy encomium of literacy? For it is by means of writing alone that the dead are brought to the minds of the living, and it is through the written word that people who are spatially very far apart communicate with each other as if they were nearby. As to treaties made in time of war between peoples or kings, the safety provided by the written word is the best guarantee of the survival of the agreement. Generally it is this alone which preserves the finest sayings of wise men and the oracles of the gods, as well as philosophy and all of culture, and hands them on to succeeding generations for all time. Therefore, while it is true that nature is the cause of life, the cause of the good life is education based on the written word.89

The finest literary productions, written in the most sophisticated scripts, were undertaken for Homer in Greek and for Virgil in Latin for many centuries on papyrus scrolls. The Biblia Sacra, the Latin Bible, in a vellum codex, superseded these within the first few centuries of the Christian Church. Such publications were more highly valued and better looked after than others, and large numbers of them were produced.90 Testifying to the increasing sophistication of the written word and the society it served, oral poetry became literary poetry already in antiquity. Homer's Iliad and Odyssey, for example, are
96 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

`primary' or oral epics: their original purpose being recitation, their principal attributes were construction, narrative appeal and story presentation. Virgil's Æneid, on the other hand, is a `secondary' or literary epic, its principal attributes lying in the individuality and grandeur of literary style and diction. This was clearly the consequence of reading and writing on a grand scale, undertaken by the thousands of literates in ancient Rome. Such a literary, as opposed to oral, composition also informed the New Testament, the hybrid product of Greek and Jewish traditions. The New Testament came to experience among Christians a similar veneration to that of the Jews towards the Old Testament, the Hebrew Bible. Transposed to and transformed on the Italian peninsula, this veneration for sacred scripture set the foundation for the Latin Middle Ages. Classical texts seem verbose to us today, and with good reason. They are, by all modern standards, bombastic, pretentious, disorganized, repetitious, even scattered, filled with digressions and incidentals. For it is the literature of a speechbased, not a text-based, society. Orator-authors prioritized other things, their audiences comprising more listeners than readers. To enjoy these texts today we should actually read them aloud with gesticulations, perhaps imagining before us an atrium filled with smiling toga-clad relatives, nodding wellwishers and cheering sycophants. And ecce: the text suddenly springs to life. It was only in the later centuries of antiquity ­ when Greek, Jewish and Latin cultures informed the `Christian culture' that would infuse the Middle Ages with other values, priorities and practices ­ that reading turned more introspective and silent, the private pursuit, the inner quest. As early Greeks and Romans had experienced the `papyrus tongue' that transformed reading into a popular oral tool for accessing information, their descendants came to know the `parchment eye' that imparted Faith itself in solitary silence. Yet beyond the Mediterranean's sway lay an entire world of reading.

t h e p a p y r u s t o n g u e . 97

References

o n e . t h e i m m o rt a l w i t n e s s
1 Miriam Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Literature, vol. 1 (Berkeley, 1973). 2 Uta Frith, `Reading by Eye and Writing by Ear', in P. A. Kolers, M. E. Wrolstad and H. Bouma, eds, Processing of Visible Language (New York, 1979), pp. 379­90. 3 D.C. Mitchell, The Process of Reading: A Cognitive Analysis of Fluent Reading and Learning to Read (Chichester and New York, 1982). 4 Adapted from David Crystal, The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language, 2nd edn (Cambridge, 1997). 5 Roy Harris, The Origin of Writing (London, 1986). 6 Julian Jaynes, The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind (Princeton, 1976). 7 Pierre Chaunu, `Foreword', in Henri-Jean Martin, The History and Power of Writing, trans. Lydia G. Cochrane (Chicago and London, 1994), pp. vii-xiv. 8 Steven Roger Fischer, A History of Writing (London, 2001). 9 Ibid. 10 Martin, The History and Power of Writing. 11 Fischer, A History of Writing. 12 Marvin A. Powell, `Three Problems in the History of Cuneiform Writing: Origins, Direction of Script, Literacy', Visible Language, XV/4 (1981), pp. 419­40. 13 Robert Claiborne, The Birth of Writing (New York, 1974). 14 Dominique Charpin, `Le geste, la parole et l'écrit dans la vie juridique en Babylonie ancienne', in Ecritures, système idéographique et pratique expressive (Paris, 1982), pp. 65­74. 15 Fischer, A History of Writing. 16 Roland G. Kent, Old Persian: Grammar, Texts, Lexicon, American Oriental Series, 33 (New Haven, CT, 1953). 17 Rüdiger Schmitt, The Bisitun Inscription of Darius the Great: Old Persian Text (London, 1991). 18 David Diringer, The Hand-Produced Book (London, 1953). 19 Piotr Michalowski, `Writing and Literacy in Early States: A Mesopotamianist Perspective', in Deborah Keller-Cohen, ed., Literacy: Interdisciplinary Conversations (Cresskill, NJ, 1993), pp. 49­70. 20 Georges Roux, Ancient Iraq (London, 1964). 21 Claiborne, The Birth of Writing. 22 Ibid.

347

23 C. J. Gadd, Teachers and Students in the Oldest Schools (London, 1956). 24 William W. Hallo and J.J.A. van Dijk, The Exaltation of Inanna (New Haven, CT, 1968). 25 Rephrased from the citation in Alberto Manguel, A History of Reading (London, 1996), replacing `wise ... ignorant' with `tutored ... untutored'. 26 Martin, The History and Power of Writing. 27 M. W. Green, `The Construction and Implementation of the Cuneiform Writing System', Visible Language, XV/4 (1981), pp. 345­72. 28 Jerrold S. Cooper, `Sumerian and Akkadian', in Peter T. Daniels and William Bright, eds, The World's Writing Systems (Oxford and New York, 1996), pp. 37­57. Also M. Civil and R. Biggs, `Notes sur des textes sumériens archaïques', Revue d'Assyriologie, LX (1966), pp. 1­16. 29 Epiphanius Wilson, Babylonian and Assyrian Literature (Miami, 2002); B. Meissner, Die babylonische-assyrische Literatur (Leipzig, 1927). 30 C.B.F. Walker, Cuneiform, Reading the Past (London, 1987). 31 Florian Coulmas, The Writing Systems of the World (Oxford and New York, 1989). 32 James W. Thompson, Ancient Libraries (Hamden, CT, 1940). 33 Claiborne, The Birth of Writing. 34 Ibid. 35 Hermann Hunger, Babylonische und assyrische Kolophone, Alter Orient und Altes Testament, 2 (Kevelaer, 1968). 36 Claiborne, The Birth of Writing. 37 Ibid. 38 Otto Schroeder, Die Tontafeln von El-Amarna, Vorderasiatische Schriftdenkmäler, 12 (Leipzig, 1915). 39 Fischer, A History of Writing. 40 Robert K. Ritner, `Egyptian Writing', in Daniels and Bright, eds, The World's Writing Systems, pp. 73-84. 41 John Baines, `Literacy and Ancient Egyptian Society', Man, n.s. XVIII (1983), pp. 572­99. 42 J. Baines and C. J. Eyre, `Four Notes on Literacy', Göttinger Miszellen, LXI (1983), pp. 65­96. 43 Baines, `Literacy and Ancient Egyptian Society'. 44 Wolfgang Helck, Die Lehre des Dw3-Htjj (Wiesbaden, 1970). 45 Paul C. Smither, `An Old Kingdom Letter Concerning the Crimes of Count Sabni', Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, XXVIII (1942), pp. 16­19. 46 Baines, `Literacy and Ancient Egyptian Society'. 47 J. J. Jansen, `The Early State in Egypt', in Henri J. M. Claessen and Peter Skalník, eds, The Early State (The Hague, 1978), pp. 213­34. 48 Baines and Eyre, `Four Notes on Literacy'. 49 R. O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts (Oxford, 1969). 50 Claiborne, The Birth of Writing. 51 Baines, `Literacy and Ancient Egyptian Society'. 52 Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Literature; William Kelley Simpson, ed., The Literature of Ancient Egypt (New Haven, CT, 1973). 53 William L. Moran, trans. and ed., The Amarna Letters (Baltimore, 1992). 54 Ibid. 55 Thompson, Ancient Libraries.

348 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

56 Baines, `Literacy and Ancient Egyptian Society'. 57 Asko Parpola, Deciphering the Indus Script (Cambridge, 1994). 58 Fischer, A History of Writing. See also Steven Roger Fischer, Evidence for Hellenic Dialect in the Phaistos Disk (Berne et al., 1988) and Glyphbreaker (New York, 1997). 59 Crystal, The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language. 60 Baines, `Literacy and Ancient Egyptian Society'.

t wo . t h e p a py r u s t o n g u e
1 Pliny the Younger, Plinius der Jüngere, Briefe, ed. Helmut Kasten (Berlin, 1982), IX:36. 2 William V. Harris, Ancient Literacy (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1989). 3 Alphonse Dain, `L'écriture grecque du VIIIe siècle avant notre ère à la fin de la civilisation byzantine', in L'écriture et la psychologie des peuples (Paris, 1963), pp. 167­80. 4 Robert K. Logan, The Alphabet Effect: The Impact of the Phonetic Alphabet on the Development of Western Civilization (New York, 1986). 5 M. B. Parkes, Pause and Effect: An Introduction to the History of Punctuation in the West (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1993); E. Otha Wingo, Latin Punctuation in the Classical Age, Janua Linguarum Series Practica, vol. 133 (The Hague, 1972). 6 F. Messerschmidt, Archiv für Religionswissenschaft (Berlin, 1931). 7 Steven Roger Fischer, A History of Writing (London, 2001); Roger D. Woodard, Greek Writing from Knossos to Homer: A Linguistic Interpretation of the Origin of the Greek Alphabet and the Continuity of Ancient Greek Literacy (Oxford, 1997). 8 Harris, Ancient Literacy. 9 Michael Stubbs, Language and Literacy: The Sociolinguistics of Reading and Writing (London, 1980). 10 Rosalind Thomas, Literacy and Orality in Ancient Greece (Cambridge, 1992) and Oral Tradition and Written Record in Classical Athens (Cambridge, 1989). 11 Jacqueline de Romilly, Histoire et raison chez Thucydide, 2nd edn (Paris, 1967). 12 Eric Alfred Havelock, The Muse Learns to Write: Reflections on Orality and Literacy from Antiquity to the Present (New Haven, CT, 1986). 13 Plato, `Phædrus', in The Collected Dialogues, ed. Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns (Princeton, 1961). 14 Plato's Phaedrus, trans. with introduction and commentary by R. Hackforth (Cambridge, 1952). 15 Henri-Jean Martin, The History and Power of Writing, trans. Lydia G. Cochrane (Chicago and London, 1994). 16 Galen, De usu partium, I:8, cited in Harris, Ancient Literacy. 17 Menander, Sententiæ, 657, in Works, ed. W. G. Arnott (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1969). 18 Harris, Ancient Literacy. 19 Martin, The History and Power of Writing. 20 Harris, Ancient Literacy. 21 Plato, The Republic, trans. B. Jowett (New York, 1960). 22 Harris, Ancient Literacy.

r e f e r e n c e s . 349

23 Henri-Irénée Marrou, Histoire de l'éducation dans l'Antiquité, 2 vols (Paris, 1981). 24 Plutarch, `Life of Alexander', in The Parallel Lives, ed. B. Perrin (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1970). 25 Harris, Ancient Literacy. 26 Ibid. 27 Howard A. Parsons, The Alexandrian Library: Glory of the Hellenic World (New York, 1967). 28 Athenæus, Deipnosophistai, ed. Charles Burton Gulick, vol. 1 (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1969). 29 G. Anderson, Ancient Fiction: The Novel in the Græco-Roman World (London, 1984); T. Hägg, The Novel in Antiquity (Oxford, 1983). 30 Robert Pattison, On Literacy: The Politics of the Word from Homer to the Age of Rock (Oxford, 1982). 31 Henri-Jean Martin, `Pour une histoire de la lecture', Revue française d'histoire du livre, XLVII (1977), pp. 583­608. 32 Israel Finkelstein and Neil Asher Silberman, The Bible Unearthed: Archaeology's New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of its Sacred Texts (New York, 2001). 33 Gersom Scholem, Kabbalah (Jerusalem, 1974). 34 Alberto Manguel, A History of Reading (London, 1996). 35 Harris, Ancient Literacy. 36 Martin, The History and Power of Writing. 37 Ibid. 38 Cicero, De oratore, ed. E. W. Sutton and H. Rackham, vol. 1 (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1967). 39 Henri Levy-Bruhl, `L'écriture et le droit', in Marcel Cohen, ed., L'écriture et la psychologie des peuples (Paris, 1963), p. 329. 40 Marrou, Histoire de l'éducation dans l'Antiquité. 41 Martin, The History and Power of Writing. 42 Alan K. Bowman, Life and Letters on the Roman Frontier: Vindolanda and its People (London, 1994). Also A. Bowman and J. Thomas, The Vindolanda Writing-Tablets, Tabulae Vindolandenses, II (London, 1994). 43 Fischer, A History of Writing. 44 Martin, The History and Power of Writing. 45 Harris, Ancient Literacy. 46 Pliny the Younger, Plinius der Jüngere, Briefe, IV:7. 47 Frederick George Kenyon, Books and Readers in Ancient Greece and Rome, 4 vols, 2nd edn (Oxford, 1951). 48 Quintilian, The Institutio Oratoria of Quintilian, trans. H. E. Butler (Oxford, 1920­22), I:1:12. 49 Suetonius, `Augustus', in Lives of the Twelve Caesars, ed. J. C. Rolfe (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1948), LXXXIX:3. 50 Pliny the Younger, Plinius der Jüngere, Briefe, V:17. 51 Ibid., IX:34. 52 Martial, Epigrams, trans. J. A. Pott and F. A. Wright (London, 1924), I:38. 53 Pliny the Younger, Plinius der Jüngere, Briefe, IV:27. 54 Martial, Epigrammata, in Works, ed. W. C. Ker (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1919­20), III:44.

350 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

55 Aline Rouselle, Porneia (Paris, 1983), quoted in Manguel, A History of Reading. 56 Seneca, `De tranquillitate', in Moral Essays, ed. R. M. Gummere (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1955). 57 Gerontius, Vita Melaniae Junioris, ed. and trans. Elizabeth A. Clark (New York and Toronto, 1984). 58 Cicero, De natura deorum, ed. H. Rackham (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1933), II:2. 59 Harris, Ancient Literacy. 60 Jérôme Carcopino, Daily Life in Ancient Rome: The People and the City at the Height of the Empire, ed. Henry T. Rowell, trans. E. O. Lorimer (New Haven, CT, 1940). 61 Erich Auerbach, Literatursprache und Publikum in der lateinischen Spätantike und im Mittelalter (Berne, 1958), quoted in Manguel, A History of Reading. 62 Pliny the Elder, Naturalis Historia, ed. W.H.S. Jones (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1968), XIII:11. 63 Martial, Epigrammata, XIV:184. 64 Anthony J. Mills, `A Penguin in the Sahara', Archeological Newsletter of the Royal Ontario Museum, II (March 1990), p. 37. 65 C. H. Roberts, `The Codex', Proceedings of the British Academy, XL (1954), pp. 169­204. 66 R. Reed, Ancient Skins, Parchments, and Leathers (London and New York, 1972). 67 Edward Maunde Thompson, Handbook of Greek and Latin Palæography (London, 1906). 68 Ausonius, Opuscules, 113, quoted in Manguel, A History of Reading. 69 St Irenæus, Contra hæreses, in Opera, ed. U. Mannucci, 2 vols (Rome, 1907­8), III:1. 70 Robin Lane Fox, Pagans and Christians (New York, 1986). 71 Augustine of Hippo, `Of the Origin and Nature of the Soul', in Basic Writings of Saint Augustine, ed. Whitney J. Oates (London, 1948), IV:7:9. 72 Ibid., `Concerning the Trinity', in Basic Writings of Saint Augustine, XV:10:19. 73 St Augustine's Confessions, with an English Translation by William Watts, 1631, 2 vols (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1989), VI:3. 74 Bernard M. W. Knox, `Silent Reading in Antiquity', Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies, IX/4 (1968), pp. 421­35. 75 Josef Balogh, `"Voces Paginarum": Beiträge zur Geschichte des lauten Lesens und Schreibens', Philologus, LXXXII (1927), pp. 84­109, 202­40. 76 Plutarch, `On the Fortune of Alexander', in Moralia, ed. Frank Cole Babbitt, vol. 4 (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1972), fragment 340a. 77 Ibid., `Brutus', in The Parallel Lives. 78 Cicero, Tusculan Disputations, ed. J. E. King (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1952), V. 79 Ptolemy, `On the Criterion', in The Criterion of Truth, ed. Pamela Huby and Gordon Neal (Oxford, 1952). 80 St Cyril of Jerusalem, The Works of Saint Cyril of Jerusalem, trans. L. P. McCauley and A. A. Stephenson (Washington, DC, 1968), I. 81 Saint Augustine's Confessions, VI:3.

r e f e r e n c e s . 351

82 Ibid., VIII:12. 83 Sidonius Apollinaris, Epistolæ, in Poems and Letters, ed. W. B. Anderson, 2 vols (Cambridge, MA, and London, 1936), II:9:4. 84 Henry Bettenson, Documents of the Christian Church (Oxford, 1963). 85 Jean Leclercq, The Love of Learning and the Desire for God: A Study of Monastic Culture, trans. Catharine Misrahi, 3rd edn (New York, 1982). 86 Pierre Paul Courcelle, Late Latin Writers and their Greek Sources, trans. Harry E. Wedeck (Cambridge, MA, 1969). 87 André Grabar, Christian Iconography: A Study of its Origins (Princeton, nj, 1968). 88 F. Piper, Über den christlichen Bilderkreis (Berlin, 1852), quoted in Manguel, A History of Reading. 89 Diodorus Siculus, XII:13, quoted in Harris, Ancient Literacy. 90 Fischer, A History of Writing.

t h r e e . a wo r l d o f r e a d i n g
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Herrlee G. Creel, Chinese Writing (Washington, DC, 1943). Andrew Robinson, The Story of Writing (London, 1995). Burton Watson, Early Chinese Literature (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1972). André Levy, Chinese Literature, Ancient and Classical (Bloomington, IN, 2000). Steven Roger Fischer, A History of Writing (London, 2001). John DeFrancis, The Chinese Language: Fact and Fantasy (Honolulu, 1984). J.A.G. Roberts, A History of China (London, 1999). For example, Victor H. Mair, The Columbia History of Chinese Literature (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 2002), and Wilt L. Idema, A Guide to Chinese Literature (Ann Arbor, 1997). Kathleen Gough, `Implications of Literacy in Traditional China and India', in Jack Goody, ed., Literacy in Traditional Societies (Cambridge, 1968), pp. 70­84. J. Needham, Science and Civilization in China (Cambridge, 1954). Gough, `Implications'. David G. Chibbett, The History of Japanese Printing and Book Illustration (Tokyo, 1977). Evelyn Sakakida Rawski, Education and Popular Literacy in Ch'ing China (Ann Arbor, 1979). Ibid. Alberto Manguel, A History of Reading (London, 1996). Rawski, Education and Popular Literacy in Ch'ing China. Creel, Chinese Writing. Chinese Repository, IV (1835­36), p. 190, cited in Rawski, Education and Popular Literacy in Ch'ing China. Rawski, Education and Popular Literacy in Ch'ing China. Ibid. Fischer, A History of Writing. David R. McCann, Early Korean Literature (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 2000). Peter H. Lee, Korean Literature: Topics and Themes (New York, 1968). Kichung Kim, An Introduction to Classical Korean Literature: From Hyangga to P'Ansori (New York, 1996).

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

352 . a h i s t o r y o f r e a d i n g

cñ 252Z 2i55Z

 TT¡b¢£TT¤¥U¦§¨©ªVT«T¯

*FQRPFjCEj1OFFDIj

«ÿ*
!% % %ú %#* %% %!#%%QQ  %

**%
%  %
 $"% %%

 ,??0Þd{ÅÅyÍÅÆÆÅÞY²ÅÆ¢ÆÍÆÞ¸Þp²¸¬¸ØÞ

p¢ÅÞÓ¸¼ªÞ¸¼¢¢²y¬¬ØÞy»»¼Þ ¢²ÞS¼²ÞÍ²¼ÞÆÞÆ¢ÞC üU11U8 TZ1°
 ,?93ÞØÞR¢Æ¢¸²ÅÞJ¬¢²Þd¢¬ÞnKÞ//Þ¼ÍÞWÍØ²ÅÞ=7+,3Þhy¼¢ÅÞYÆÞÆ¼y²Å¬yÆÞÓ¢ÆÞÆÞ ÅÍ»»¸¼ÆÞ¸ÞyÞ¼y²ÆÞ¸°ÞÆÞS¼²Þd¢²¢ÅËÞ¸ÞOÍ¬ÆÍ¼Þ

pÞÆ¼y²Å¬yÆ¸¼ÞÓ¢ÅÅÞÆ¸ÞÆy²ªÞQyÐ¢ÞSÄÞ¸Þn¸¼y°ÞR²¬y²ÞQ¼&Þdy¼y¼ÆÞsy¼¬ØÞ¸Þg×¸¼Þ {²ÞQ¼%ÞOy¼¬ÅÞe©¢¸ª¢ªÆ©¢²Þ¸ÞL±ÅÆ¼y°Þ¸¼ÞÆ¢¼Þ²¼¸ÍÅÞ¬»&Þ
 ¼¢ÆÅÞ¼Å¼Ñ%Þe¸Þ»y¼ÆÞ¸ÞÆ¢ÅÞ¸¸ªÞ°~ØÞÞ¼»¼¸ÍÞ ¢²Þy²ØÞ¸¼°ÞØÞy²ØÞ¬Æ¼¸·Þ¸¼Þ

°y²¢Þ°y²ÅÞ¢²¬Í¢²Þ»¸Æ¸¸»Ø¢²Þ¼¸¼¢²Þ¸¼Þ¢²¸¼°yÆ¢¸²ÞÅÆ¸¼yÞ{²Þ ¼Ê¢Ñy¬Þ Ó¢Æ¸ÍÆÞ»¼°¢ÅÅ¢¸²Þ¢²ÞÓ¼¢Æ¢²Þ¸°ÞÆÞ»Í¬¢Å¼Þ p¢ÅÞ¸¸ªÞÅ²ÆÞ¢²ÞYpOÞVy¼{°¸²ÞØÞQR^ÞO¸¼»¸¼yÆ¢¸²Þy²Þ»¼¢²ÆÞy²Þ¸Í²Þ ¢²ÞÆÞ r²¢ÆÞnÆyÆÅÞ¸ÞL±¼¢Þ _¢¼y¼ØÞ¸ÞO¸²¼ÅÅÞOyÆy¬¸¢²¢²hÍ¬¢Æ¢¸²ÞQyÆyÞ c¼¸¢V¸Í¼y²Þ 8ruÚ ,?,,,?>9Þ wVÅÆÞÆÞ¬yÞ»y¼¸¬%ÞR²¬¢ÅÞ VÅÆÍ¼Þ{²ÞÅ»ÞC8ru _¼¸¢V¸Í¼y²Þ HÞÆ¼y²Å¬yÆÞ¸°ÞÆÞ S¼²ÞØÞ M¸ÅÆ¸ªÞM¼¼&Þ »%Þ £ 8 gÆ¸¼Þ¸¸ª*Þ Y²¬ÍÅÞ¢¬¦¸¼y»¢Þ¼¼²ÅÞy²Þ ¢²Õ&Þ [nMeÞ+/9/,/,=07Þ . ÞO¸°°Í²¢Æ¢¸²%Þ /%Þn¢²ÅÞy²ÞÅØ°¸¬Å Þ 0 ÞWÍ°y²ÞÑ¸¬ÍÆ¢¸²&Þ 3ÞY²Æ¯Æ%Þ 7%ÞVÅÆÍ¼Þ YÞp¢Æ¬Þ Ve37/&_3=Þ ,??0Þ 0+/ /I/+Þ

?/03?+=Þ O\Þ

*)3)31C

%k¤ 7nvl 2Kc=v
v *=8HYK8bv4Y<vU6Ff4F=v

lKKKv

x -=vX4E=v [Av#f^b=Ti=bv
-=v$^=b8K=YcQ8v$=^K[<v -=v)=i=Yc==YcHv4Y<vKFHc==YcHv=Ycg^K=bv -=v"KY=c==YcHv=Ycf^nv -=vKbc[^nv[AvcH=v$^=HfX4Yv *H=v*k=YcK=cHv=Ycf^nv =^v #x *[<4nv *H=v^Kc=^K4v[AvfX4YKcnv

x x x "x #x x x "x "x

F

x ^4KYv4Y<v4Y<v
-=vnY4XK8v#^F4YKu4cK[Yv[AvYKX4Tbv KT4c=^4Tv)sX=c^nv -=v.=^c=7^4c=bv -=vi[TfdK[Yv[AvcH=vYc=^K[^vK=T<v ^[XvKbHv c[vfX4Yv 8HcHn[X[`HKbXv =^K4Tv&=b\K^4cK[Yv4Y<vU5Y<v[8[X[cK[Yv \HK7K[X[`HKbXv )4f^[X[`HKbXv -=^[X[^\HKbXv +I=^[X[`Hv&=\cKT=bv

x x x "x x x x #x x x x "x

iKKKv

;

%f4<^f\=<4Tv

4XX4Tbv

/4TSKYFv 4Y<v^4b\KYFv $KeH=9[X[^\HKbXv =Y=^4Vv*H[fFHebv[Yvi[TfeK[Yvf\v e[veH=v$^KX4e=bv

x x x "x x x x x x #x #x x x "x "x "x "x "x "#x #x #x #x #x #"x ##x ##x x x "x x x x x x "x #x

x ^9H4YeH^[\K4Ybv4Y<v$4T4=[4YeH^[\K4Ybv
YeH^[\[X[^\HKbXv -=vYeH^[\[K<bvY9=be[^v *H=vfbe^4V4YeH^[\K4Ybv ^4YK4Vv)e^f9ef^=v -=v^9H4YeH^[\K4Ybv *H=v$4V4=[4YeH^[\K4Ybv -=v$4T4=[4YeH^[\K4Yv)SfTTv *H=v)\^=4<KYFv [AveH=v[^eK94Tv4Yv -=v K<<T=v[^e=lv [e[^vfY9eK[Yv [e[^vfY9eK[Yv *H=v [XKYK<v^4KYv $^KXKeKi=v fX4Yv

*H=v4YFf4F=v [AvYeH^[\[K<bv 3KYR4YeH^[\fbv T4S=<v$=77T=bv *H=vfbe^4T4YeH^[\K4Yv)e=^=[eo\=v *H=v^9H4YeH^[\K4Ybv *H=v^9H4YeH^[\K4Yv)e=^=[eo\=v *H=v$4T4=[4YeH^[\K4Ybv iK<=Y9=v[Av"=4Y<=^eH4Tv *H=v=i4W[Kb[ 47Ke4ev 4Y<vT[eHKYFv iK<=Y9=v [AvYe=TTKF=Y9=v [Av4v"[ev)e^K9eTnv*=9JYK:Tv"4ef^=v *H=v[Y=vfTev f^K4Tv$T49=bv #eH=^viK<=Y9=v *H=vFf4F=v [Av$^=H[XKYK<bv 4YbvYe=TTKF=Y9=v [fbe=^K4Yv*=9HYK94Tv$^[e[eo\=v

x *H=v"=4YeH^[\K4Ybv
*H=v$HnbK94Tv$4bev4Y<vfef^=v [Av  *H=v)SfTTv [Av_ ^4\HK9v$^[CT=bv

;6

6[

-=vi[TfeK[Yv [Av"=4YeH^[\K4Yv*n\=bv $HnbK:Tv)e[;Fv *H=vfX4Yv[AveH=vfef^=v -=vi[TfeK[Yv[AveH=v"=4YeH^[\K4Yv^4KYv Ki=^bKC84eL[Yv4Y<v*=X\[v[Av*=8HYK:Tvi[TfeK[Yv -=v)e4F=bv [Av*=8HYK84Tvi[TfeL[Yv *H=v)e[Y=vY<fbe^nv Ki=^bKC:eL[Yv[Av$^[<f8ebv Ki=^bKC84eK[Yv[AveHYK8v^[f\bv

x x #x x x x x #x x x x x #x x x x x x x x x "x "x x x x #x "x "x "x #x #x x x #x

x +I=v)[8K4Tv #^F4YKbXv
*H=vK[T[Fnv[Av)[8K=eK=bv *=8HYK:Tv8[Y[XK8v)[8K4Tv -=v$^KXKeLi=v^[f\v -=v*=^^Ke[^nv *=8HYK84Tv!fTeKi4T=Y8=v [^Xbv [Av)s7K[bKbv *H=v*^4YbKeK[Yv e[v 4YvF^K8fTef^4Tv 8[Y[Xnv $^[e[be[8S7^==<KYFv $^[e[4F^K8fTef^=v ^K8fTef^=v 4Y<v)e[8S7^==<LYFv )=eeT=<v 4Y<v"[X4<K8v ^[f\bv )[8K4TvT4bb=bv *H=v^==KYFv[AveH=v*=8HYK8K4Yv KiKTKu4eL[Yv *H=v(b=v[Av$^[X=eH=fbv -=vKenv *H=v^=4Sf\v[AveH=vKepv *H=v$^=b=Yev*KX=v

x YFf4F=v)nX7[Tbv
-=vK^eHv [Av^4\HKbXv *H=v4^Tnv=i=T[\X=Yev [Av^4\HKbXv *H=v)\^=4<v [Av)nX7[Tbv 0^KeKYFv4Y<v eH=vUMY=4^Ku4eK[Yv[Av)nX7[Tbv HKY=b=v0^KeLYFv KY=4^v^4\HKbXv

lv

;¯

->v[Ybc^N8cN[Yv[Av,H[fFHcv >n[Y<v/^NcNYF
v,H>vf<N[iNbf4Tv >X[av4Z<v ¬ìÿ

x x

+

x ,H>v^>>OYFv [Av >X[^nv
)\>8N>bv4Y<vcHYN8v^[f\v YbcNY8cv4Y<vYc>TTNF>Y8>v YbcNY8cv4Y<v^>><[Xv )[8N4Tv >X[^nv >X[^nv #\>^4cN[Y4Tv

#x #x x x x x x x x x "x x x x x #x x x x x "x "x #x x x x

>8H4YN:Tv#\>^4cN[Y4Tv)>]f>Y8>bv $>^N[<N84TTnv&>8f^^NYFv [^vl8>\cN[Y4Tv#\>^4cN[Y4Tv)>]f>Y8>bv #\>^4cN[Y4Tv>H4iN[^v)h 4v1H[T>v

"x >bcf^>v4Y<v$^[F^4Xv
T>X>Yc4_nvY4TnbNbv [AvcH>v>bcf^>v ->vYc>^X>bHNYFv[Av,[[Tbv 4Y<vcH>v 4Y<TOYFv ,H>v4Y<v8cNYFvcH^[fFHvN^?8cv ,H>v4Y<v)>\4^4c><vD[Xv >8H4ZN:Tv$^[F^4Xv4Y<v [c[^vfY8cN[Yv >X[^nv [c[^vfY8cN[Yv >8H4ZN:Tv [cNi>v>bcf^>v

i[TfcN[Yv[Av#\>^4cN[Ybv4Y<v [AvcH>v>bBh^>v i[TfcN[Yv[Av#\>^4cN[Y4Tv)>]f>Y8>bv ->v4c>v [AvcH>v4Z<v

#x ,H>vl\4Y<NYFv >X[^nv
,^4YbXNbbN[Yv [Av$^[F^4Xbv #^4Tv,^4YbXObbN[Yv 4^Tnv/^Ncc>Yv,^4YbXNbbN[Yv NZ<NYFv#Y>bv/4nv4^[fY<v 4v,>lcv Y<>lv4^<bv $fY8H><v4^<bv4Y<vT>8c^[YN8v cHYN8v)nX7[Tbv >X[^nv

,

x Yc^[<f8cN[Yvc[v4v$4T>[Yc[T[Fnv[Av)qX7[Tbv
>bcH>cN8v>H4iN[^v

#x x

;



cHYK8v)cpT=v

x "x "x "x "x "x "#x "#x #x #x #x #x ##x x x #x x x x "x x x x "x x "x x x x #x x x #x x x

x -=v[<nv4bvcH=v)[f^8=v [Av.4Tf=bv 4Y<v&HncHXbv
*H=v)=Yb[^nv\4^4cfbv .Kb8=^4Tv)=YbK7KTKcpv $^Ki4cK[Yv4Y<v[Yc^[Tv fb8fT4^v)=YbK7KTKcpv *4bc=v 4bc^[Y[Xnv #TA48c[^nv4Y<v.Kbf4Tv4bc^[Y[Xnv *H=v)=Yb=v[Av)X=TTv -=v)=Yb=v [Av*[f8Hv )\4cK[c=X\[^4TvYc=F^4cP[Yv

x fY8cK[Y4Tv=bcH=cK8bv
fY8cK[Yv4Y<v[^Xv [^Xv 4Y<v &HtXbv 4c=^K4Tv

x -=v)nX7[Tbv [Av)[8K=cnv
-=v[X=bcK:cK[Yv[Av*KX=v4Y<v)\48=v *KX=v fX4YKu=<v)\48=v )[8K4Tv)\48=v cKY=^4Ycv)\48=v4Y<v&4<K4Tv)\48=v &4<K4Tv)\48=v K8^[8[bXv 4Y<v YcK]fKcnv -=v K<<T=vF=bv -=vKFHc==YcHv =Ycf^pv -=vKbKYc=F^4cK[Yv[AvcH=vKcpv -=v$^=b=Yc<4nvKcnv -=v)nX7[Tbv[Av)[8K=cpv ^=bbv ccKcf<=bv4Y<vYFf4F=v )[8K4Tv=bcH=cK8bv4Y<vKFf^4cKi=vKA=v 48^[8[bXv

x -=vFf4F=v [Av[^Xbv
-=v#^KFKYbv4Y<v4^Tnv@=T[\X=Ycv[AvKFf^4cKj=v=H4iK[^v

mKKv

;

*H=v 4^TK=bcvX4F=bv KG^4cKi=v'HrcHXv ^4\HK8v4Y<v$T4bcK8vKFf^4TKbXv $4T=[TKcHK8v&=4TKbXv *H=v"[YCFf^4cKi=v

x x x x #x x #x x x

x X4FKY4^rv^==<[Xv4Y<vcH=v4c=v[Avz

N$ 1Z %|

s

   P

>@
[(K[*<4>IU[I[4K[>U[#([K24I[2<B[4I[B)[$D4K=[4>DBGK@$([#($OI([4N[DD(G@$([ $B4@$4&(&[R4K2[K2([DG($4I([>B>(@K[R2(@[K2([D<(B@KB<B14$<[G($BG&[I2BRI[K2K[K2([ #G4@[RI[ #BOK[KB[KM4@[4KI[DG(I(@K[<(Q(<[B)[&(Q(<BD>(@K
[(ID4K([K2(4G[(@BG>BOI[ BG#4K [ G4&1(I[ K2([ (@&(GK2<4@I[ R(G([ @BK[ I[ @4@(K((@K2$(@KOGV[ (QB<OK4B@4IN[ 4>14@(&[K2(>[KC[ #([@K2GBDBD4K2($4@([(I$D(&[/B>[K2([(GK4GV
[2K[4I[(Q(@[ >BG([ 4>DBGK@K[KB[ $;@BR<(&1([ 4I[K2K[K2(U[$KO<<U[ G(DG(I(@K[[KGAI4K4B@[KB[ BOG[ BR@[DG(24IKBGV
[(4G[4@&OIKGV[R2BI([&4I$BQ(G4(I[5@[JB>([$I(I[(TK(@&(&[!BIK[I[ )G[I[>(K==OG1V[RI[KG@I4K4B@<[@&[IB[RI[K2(4G[IKKOI[ 4@[R2K[R([G(1G&[I[K2([ ID2(G([B)[2O>@[K2BO12K[DGBE(G
[ K[2I[K;(@[OI[IOGDG4I4@1<U[<B@1[KB[ G($B1@4X([(@&(GK2<[>@I[G(<[D<$(
[ Q(GU[DBII4#<([O@$B@I$4BOI["$([RI[(>D<BU(&[5@[BG&(G[KB[&(@U[K2K[2([RI[BOG[ @(TK&BBG[@(412#BG[K2K[R([R(G([24I[2(4GI[2([?BIK[<B@1<4Q(&[B)[K2(I([KG4$;I[IK4<<[ B$$I4B@=<U[#GBO12K[BOK[KB&U[$B@I4IKI[4@[,G>4@1[K2K[ RI[=G(&U[ <6Q5@1[K[K2([K4?([@'[K2([(@&(GK2<4@I[R(G([>(G(<U[IOGQ4QBGI[5@[R2K[RI[<G(&U[ [#(KK(G[RBG<&
[([$@[4?14@([K2([(T4IK(@$([B)[$B@I4&(G#<([G$4<[&78 (G(@$(I[K[ K2([L9([D(G2DI[B)[K2([BG&(G[B)[ K2BI([#(KS((@[OGBD(@I[@&[ OIKG<4@[#BG414@(I[ KB&U[#OK[K2(G([4I[#IB<OK(<U[@B[DB4@K[4@[G(Q4Q4@1[K2([2WDBK2(K4%=[ 
4  [R2BI([4@K(<<41(@$([IODDBI(&<U[D(@(KGK(&[K2([<(B@K2GBD4@I[K24$;[I;P<<[K[<B@1[ G@1(
[Q(@[ IODDBI4@1[K2K[K24I[R(G([KGP([4K[RBO<&[@BK[<K(G[K2([)G[?BG([B#Q4BOI[ )$K[K2K[K2([<(B@K2GBD4@I[ O@&(GIKBB&[@&[<4Q(&[BOK[K2([4&(I[<<(1(&<U[DOK[4@[ K2(4G[>4@&I[#U[#(4@1I[?BG([&(Q(<BD(&[K2@[K2(>I(<Q(I
[2([G(<[KGOK2[I[>BG([$G(Y 0<=U[$B@&O$K(&[(T$QK4B@I[>U[I2BR[4@[K2([0LOG([4I[DGB##<U[4>D<(G[OG4@1[K2([ .[>4==(A@4[ B)[(@&(HK2<[ >@I[ (T5IK(@$([K2([KGAI4K4B@[)GB>[K2([<IK[G$24$[ @K2HBDB4&I[  K2([ -GIK[ G(DG(I(@KK4Q(I[ B)[BOG[BR@[ID($4(I[ KBB;[D<$([ 1G&O<<U[ +($K4@1[#B&U[ #G4@[@&[$K4B@I[<5;(
[

#   }(û~ ([DBII(II[@B[&4H($K[>(@I[B)[ IKO&U4@1[<@1O1([#()BG([RG4K4@1
[K(>DKI[2Q([ #((@[?&([KB[<4@;[K2([(T(G$4I([B)[ID(($2[KB[K2([I2D([ B)[K2([>@&4#<([BG[K2([I4X([ B)[K2([4@I(GL4B@[G4&1(I[B)[ K2([KB@1O([>OI$<(I[#OK[IO$2[ID($O<K4B@I[>;([=4KK<([I(@I(
[ 2([DHB#<(>[B)[<@1O1([ ;f @BK[[>KK(G[B)[<4A1O [>OI$<(I
[B@1O([ >BQ(>(@KI[ I(GQ(&[)BG[DGB$(II4@1[)BB&[#()BG([K2(U[2&[[D2B@(K4$[0@$K4B@[@&[K2([<4?4K(&[/((Z &B>[B)[>BQ(>(@K[B)[O(G[>@I[KB@1O([@BK[@[(IU[)$K[KB[&(>B@IKGK([>KK(GI[ GK2(G[=4KL<(
[2([DB4@K[K[4IIO([;f@(OGB>BKBG[BG1@4XK4B@[@&[K2([FO<4LV[B)[$(G(#G<[ DGB:($K4B@I
[([(G[KB[K2([DGB#<(>[B)[<@1O1([&B(I[@BK[=4([5@[K3([>@&4#<([#OK[ 4@[K2([#G4@
[I(0<[4@I412KI[ #^ #([&(G4Q(&[2BR(Q(G[/B>[[IKO&U[B)[K2([DB4@KI[B)[

I!+t! 

 s

'/96:%1/I 1I:$I.<9,9I1I:$II /I)>I>%:$I6#6I :1I:$I#6I 1I,A%%,%:DI 1I:$I16#/9I 1I3$1/:%1/I/I.%.&7DI <$I 9/:I%/16.:%1/I9I>I319999I 9<#F #9:9I:$:I:$I.<9,9I 1IB699%1/I.I361#699%=,CI.16I6/I>%:$I $I /:$6131%I 9:#I :$6CI.6,CI 1/:%/<(/#I I3:$I ,6CI 1<:,%/I %/I :$I ..F .,9I >$19I%,I A3699%1/9I 91.:%.9I 3,CI/I%.316:/:I61,I I ,/#<#I 1I199%,I /:$6131%9I %9I I 5<9:(1/I :$:I .<9:I %/I .CI =%>I I 3361$I(/II61</1<:I>CI p$3:6Is>I9>I$1>I%/I:$I$%#$6I=6:6:9I :$I,I1I6941/9%=/99I =,13I  16.I :?1I31,9I:?/I>$%$I:$I/<F 61.1:16I336:<9I116&/:9I:$HI:'1/9I1I:$II>%:$I:$19I1I :$I$/II,91I 9>I:I:$I#%//%/#I1I:$%9I$3:6I:$:I%/I:$I3$C9%1,1#CI1I:$I66,I16:AI:$I ./<,I361):'1/I69I6I=6CI,19I:1I:$I%,I69I 
:I%9I.161=6I*/1?/I:$:I 69Is/IY1I:$I61/:136%:,I16:AI3,C I61,I%/I:?1I,/#<#I/1.,%9I1/I (/=1,=%/#I:$I%/%,%:CI:1I16.I>6%::/I,/#<#I9C.1,9I#63$%I/I:$I1:$6I:$I %/%,%:CI:1I 16#I=1,I9E.1,9I 3$9%I I,%/*I:$616I A%9:9I :?/I:$I$/I /I:$I%,I 16#/9I /I :$I L 31,9I1I:$I/:6%16I,I::9:I:$%6I5<,I36:'%3:'1/I'/I:$I1/9:6<:%1/I1I1.F .</%:'1/I9E.1,9I /I:$9I:9I>$%$I6I :6<I1I:$I.18I$<./II361G ):I+6I:1II:'.I>$/I>6%:'/#I%I/1:IA'9:I I 3$/1./1/I 1I #63$%I %9I /1:I <I :1I /<61,1#%,I 1//:'1/9I :$:I .I 9:,%9$I %/I$<./9I9%/I:$I%/=/:%1/I1I>6%:%/#I Cf%:I>6I<9:6,%/I 16%#%/9I>1<,I I%/3,I 1I,6/%/#I:1I>6%:I 16I 1//:%1/9I:$:I=,13I %/I$&,6/I ,6/&/#I :1I>6%:I Cf%:I &I ,#I:1I>6%:I >1<,I /1:I I 3199%,I16I <,:9II 6I:$616I/:%:,I:1I:$(/*I:$:I:$I6,:%1/9$%3I:?/I6IY/I :$I3C6.%,I /:69I 1I:$II %9I 1I:$I9.I/:<6I9I:$:I:?/I:$I9I1I :$I91/I 1/:,I 1/=1,<:%1/I/I:$I3C6.&,I /:69I1I:$I$/I p 36%.:9I  %,I/I./<,I16#/9I.%/:%/I5<,I:$/',I:'=%:CI1/*C9I>16*I>%:$I:$%6I ,%39I:$'6I::$I/I:$%6I$/9I)<9:I9I.18I$<./9I93*I>%:$I:$%6I,%39I:$%6I ::$I/I:$%6I:1/#<9I/I#9:%<,:I16I>6%:I>&:$I:$%6I$/9I1I:$(9I9$1<,II I $1>=6I:$:I$<./9I,91I<9I:$I9.I16#/9I16I.*%/#I:$(/#9I<:I:$:I I9$%!I$9I:/I3,I&/I:$I6,:%=I 319%:%1/9I 1I:$I:?1I "/:(1/9I 16I@%:%/#I :$I $/I >9I <9I 36%/%3,,CI16I.*%/#I 0I :$I I16I,/#<#I <:I >%:$I :$I %/=/;1/I1I>6%:%/#I:$I,/I:?/I:$I:?1I>9I 69:16I 1I3<:I%:I/1:$6I>CI $<./9I :$1<#$I:$CI9:6:I1<:I>%:$I:$I9.I16.<,I 9I36%.:9I /I.*I:11,9I9I>,,I9I9C.1,9I2:$I1I>$'$I6%=I61.I:$I 9.I 36199I 16I6:$6I6>I<31/I:$I 9.I9%I5<%3./:I%/I:$I 6%/I$&9I ,9I<9I :1I 1/,<I /1:I 1/,CI:$:I ,/#<#I %9I 9I $6:6%9:(I 1I$<./9I 9I6I :11,9I <:I ,91I:$:I1:$I6I:$IA3699%1/I1I:$I9.I%/:6%/9%,,CI$<./I36136:DI)<9:I9I:$I

 s

 W

,-7=9R

AUC,-?COU-% ? 9CUJ<5UA-+95AU ? U C, U =? -A U7 9C5U <G9C ?=?CU<"U-FU

HA U<"UA J ?5UAC-4AUC<U =G55U<L9UU99U,9+-9+U<J ?, -9U <C, ?UL<?AU 9<U 7<? U U59+G+ U C,9U &CC-9+U C, U AC-4AU C<+ C, ?U -AU =?<= ?5OUA= 4-9+U UC ,9->G U ?<7U C,-AU AD+U =<-9CU U =5 <9C<5<+OU <"U 5:+G+ U <G5U = ?,=AU  U CC 7=C UHCU-CUL<H5U<95OU UUA4 5 C<9U<"UUA- 9 U"<?UC, ? U-AU5-CC5 U,<= U<"U J ?U ? <J ?-9+UC, U5-J-9+U( A,U <"U"<AA-5U59+G+ AU 9 U AA 9C-5U=<-:CUC,CUL U #^ ACS 5-A,U ,<L J ?U -AU C,CU AU A<<9U AU C, ? U ? U =? ,-AC<?-U C<<5AU C, ? U ;f U=<AA--5-CPU<"U U=? ,-AC<?-U5:+G+ U"<?U C<<5AU 9U 59+G+ U? U9 G?<5<+-55OU5-:4 U 9U  <CU  U -AA<-C UL-C,.9U C, U A<-5U AC?GCG? U <"U,G794-9 
U :UL U +<U 9OU*?C, ?U C,9U C,CU , ? U -AU =?<5OU 9<U ? A<9U -9UC, U A U <"U C, U ?5. ACU 9C,?<=<-BU C<U A =?C U C, U 5 J 5U <"U59+H+ U)<7UC,CU<"UC<<64-9+U ,?<G+,<GCU,-AC<?OUG=UC<UC, U=? A 9CUC-7 UC ,9-5U=?<+? AAU,AU+<9 U,9U-9U,U L-C,U=?<+? AAU -9UE U  J 5<=7 9CU <"UC ,9-5U 59+G+ U AO7<5AU CU -AU =<AA-5 U -9U C, U AC?CU C<U <9 -J U <"UU =G? 5OU + ACI?5U C ,9-5U HC-<9U -9U=?C- U J 9U <7=5 C 5OUA1 9CU-9AC?GC-<9UL-55UCGC UU? $5 C-J UAO7<5-A7U-:U<C,UC , ?U9U =G=-5U , U <?+:-U == ?AUC<U  U AC?<9+U 9<G+,UC<U 3GAC0U? -C-9+UC, UGAC?5T <=-C, -: U9UC, U?,9C,?<=-9AUL-C,U5:+G+ UCUU5 J 5U<?? A=<9-;+UC<UC,CU <"UC, -?U C<<5AU , ? U <7=?C-J U ACG- AU <"UC<<5AU 9U A4G55AU C 55U HAU C,CUC, U ?C U <"U  J 5<=7 9CU<"U2GAC?PU<?? A=<9 UC<UC,CU<"U-<5<+-5U J 5<=7 9CU 59+G+ U 7GACU ,J U  9UJ ?OU=?-7-C-J U 2 U GCU -CUG9<HC 5OU7<G9C UC<U 7<? U C,9U J<5UA-+:5AU, U,?C ?-AC-UC?-CU<"UC, U 59+G+ U9UC ,:->G AU<#UC, U+? CU = AU -AU C,CU C, OU? U ? A<?C U C<U A=<9C9 <GA5OU-9U ? A=<9A U C<U 9U NC ?95U AC/7G5GAU 9U ? U 3GACUAUA=<9C9 <HA5OU9<9 U <?U"-5UC<U == ?U -"UC, U7C ?-5UA-CIC-<9U C?-++ ?-9+UC, 7U A AUC<U N/ACU<?U< AU9<CU<G?U, U74-9+U9UGA-9+U<"U,<== ?AU <?U -" AU 7GACU  U A?- U C<U U J ?OU -% ? 9CU 7 ,9-A7U A-9 U C, U <= ?C-<9AU -9J<5J U2U74-9+UUC<<5UC/-=C UC, U<A-<9AU"<?U-CAUGA U9UC, UC<<5U-AU=? A ?K U C<U UGA U <9U5C ?U<A-<9AU, UA7 U-AUC?G U<"UC, U-% ? 9 U CL 9CG? U -AU9<CUC, U A7 U  UA,55U? J ?CUC<U C, U<9 =CU<"U<= ?C-:+UA >H 9 AU-9U,=C ?AU a9U sGCU 7 9C/<9U<"U-CU7GACU U7 U, ? U-"UL U ? UC<U G9 ?ACUC, U5-:4U CM 9UC ,9-AU 9U5:+G+ U ,9->G AU-9J<5J U<C,U+ ACG? AU9UC<<5AUA >G 9C-55OU<?+9-R UOU 7 9AU <"UUAQ9CNUC,CU-7=?CAU <C,U'-CPU9U( N--5-CPUC<UC, UA ?- AU<"U<= ?C-<9AU -9J<5J U -AU <= ?C-9+U AP9CNU-AU AG++ AC UOU C, U 7 7<?OUU<7 AU -9C<U  -9+U AUU=?<GCU<"UC, U?-9U:UC, U=,OA-5U 9J-?<98 9CU"L U=G?AG UC, U=?55 5UL-C,U 5:+G+ U L U &9UU A-7-5?U =?< AAU C4-:+U =5 U 9UC, U A-AU <"UL,CUL U 49<LU<"U C ,:->G AU )<7U= 5 UG5CG? UC<U, G5 9U -9GAC@OU L U <G5U<=CUC, U,O=<C, 9U-+95U9U L<?U C, U = ?79 9 U <"UU<9 =CU -9+U<7=?5 U C<UC,CU<"UUC<<5U5C,<G+,U-CAU

I! +|! 

s

6"6G .GG(,:G=.6G .+/(>"7?G,G=)7G.G.,/76G.226/.,G//2.>C "+7(?G 7.G 7G (<(G .G7.6G 7,"1:6G G (,:G .GC D! ="7G "6G 6",(G 62"6G .G7,"(G 7".,6G ,G 6+((G ,:+2G.G./27",G61:,6G=.:(G 7,G<GG G.+/(>"8?G,G=)7G .G6A.(6G62(?G272G<R77G.G7G .2"((6G<.(G6",(6G:7G:,("'G7G(772G"7G=.:(G<G,G.+/.6G.G(2?G <"((G ,G ,.7G 7.7)(?G 72+",G 6A.(6G G ./27",G 61:,6G .G 7G 2,72./",6G ="7G 7"2G .:(G62"6G .G7".,6G ,G 7"2GF<G .2G6">G $% 2,7G 7..(G.2+6G=2G)2?G+:G+.2G.+/(>G,G7G(,:G=G+?G2"7G7+G ="7G=6G .,6"2(?G 2"2G 7.:G /2.(?G67#((G ("+"7G 7.G >/266",G.,27G 6"7;7".,6G G 2(?G 
(.,72.0",6G =2G 7G "27G ",2"7.26G .G7"6G 6"8;7".,G :7G 7"2G /.66""("7"6G +G2:)(?G>7,G G >72".2"B7".,G.G,.,.,27G 6@+.(6G 7..'G/(G="7G 7G,27)",6G ,G 7,")G.,/76G=2G7,D .5G .<27',G ?G .,/9G .G="G =G <G .,(?G +,:(G ./27",G<",E :2"(G ?6G :2".:6G .&76G "6G <",G .=<2G "6G6:",7G7.G 67("6G="7G 27",8?G77G7.:7G=6G",G//("G7.G26G?.,G77G.G/:2(?G<"7(G7,"(G +.7.2G,7".,G G,27)",6G (,:G/2.(?G"2G.,(?G6("?G.+G (,:G6G=G',.=G"7G7.?G7G=6G 262<G 66,7"((?G.2G.,27G6"7;7".,6G,G :6G.2G7G/:2/.6G.G.++:,"7".,G:2",G7G/4.2+,G.G7"<"7"6GG/2"+G ,7".,G",G="G(,:G,G7,"(G<".2G2G(.6(?G.+",G7G =6G(6.G :6G.2G/.67G7.G 73,6+"66".,G.G7G7".,G6?+.(6G",G7G.2+G.G,227".,G"6G 6.,G,7".,G +:67G<G+2G2:((?G",G7G2,72./",6G :7G7"6G6:/D /.6"7".,G"6G":(7G7.G +.,6727G6?G G7"2G,7".,G+2G",G7G.:26G.G 7G
(.,72./",6G<(./+,7G.,G",G="G(,:G=,7G?.,G7G2D 7".,G.G.,27G6"7;7".,6G 7.G >/266G 6,7"+,76G .GG(66G /2"6G ,7;2G .G="G =G',.=G="7G 27",7?G77G7?G=2G 7.G 6.+G >7,7G2("".:6G6G ,=G6/76G =")(GG"6:66G>7,6"<(?G(72G.,G2G=G,G.,(?G,.7G77G7?G+2G7G 7G7"+G.G7G
).,72./",6G  G.2"",G.G(,;G",G,72./."6G/2",G 37:6G6+6G7.G <G ,G(.6(?G("-'G="7G7,"(G+.7.2G,7".,G ,G7G "6G6.G (.6G 77G+/(.?",G6G7?G.G 7G6+G/7=?6G ",G7G2",G7G8=.G +",G,72./."G 272"67"6G .:(G G 772":7G 7.G .,G ,G 7G 6+G /,.+,.,G G 2(?G ,72./."6G7,"(G7"<"7?G6:676G,G >72+(?G6(.=G:7G 2.:*?G6@,2.,.:6G <.(:7".,G .G7..(6G ,G .G7G 6';((G 7.=2G 7G 677;6G .G ¶ .G 2("(G <",G <"((G7.G 7G="7G7G>/7".,G.G2.26G2(7",G 7G+.67G2,7G /2".G 6:676G 77G 2(?G ,72./."6G /2.2+G .72G 7!,G <"7(G ./27",G 61:,6G R(,:G 2((?G6/2,G2.+G 7G 6+G 6.:2G 6G7,"6G=G 2G ,7"

s

"

3$@ 3*@ 827$=@ $'7@ 3**@ '@ 3@ */&@ *@ *,/3)@ 2.7'2@ $&3@ 3*@ 3@ ;,/22*'@*@*'/3@2373*'2@3@/23@*'7//'3$<@93@3&@'@$3/@'8*$8'@ 3@ $/3@ ,/2/83*'@ (@ /,/*73*'@ *@8/$@ 2.7'2@ *'@ <*'@ &&3@ 2373*'2@ @ 3@33@2@,/**7'$<@ $3/@ 3@,$*2*,$@ 23372@ *@*22$@&'@'@3@$23@9@</2@2@33@9@8@'@*/@3*@,3@3@;23'@ *@C D! ;2@ @7&(@'@9$#'@7,/3@&#'@3**$2@ '@ Cf&<@/7> &'3@2@*//3@2,#'@@&@*@32@/$<@&'@(@'*@9<@6@'@93@93@3:*@ '37/2@ *@-$+2*,$@ 3*73@@ 723*&@ 72@3*@ 2@ 32@ '*9@2*9@33@ 3@ 7&(@ 2@ '*3@ 2@9@ @ ?*&@ 72@ 3*@ 5'@ @#'@*@&*'#<@/7$$<@ &,/*8'@32$
@3@ 7&'@ 2@'*3@ 3@&"23@ ,!'$@ *@3@,$*'3*$*$@@ 
@*&@3@/$23@&*&'3@3@9@9@,#@7,@3@3/$@3@7&(@2@2*&3'@ *3/@3'@@&*'#<@ s33@ &*&'3@ 7&(2@ 23$$@8@@8/<@$*'@9<@3*@*@73@ 3/@"*70<@9$$@@'*3@2*@&7@@&33/@*@*$*$@ 8$*,&'3@2@ *@'@ 3&2$82@ *&@ 3@ =**$*$@ *'3;3@ (@ */(='@ 3&2$82@ (@ '@ '3/$<@ '9@9<@ 93@2*4<@/7$$<@3#'@3@ ,$@ *@3@,<$3@23/&@ R9@2*> $73$<@'223@*'@''@3@&*'#<@9*@92@3@3@'('@*@3@$$@9@&723@$**#@ $$@3@9<@#@3*@3@/3/<@ 73@3@$/<@7&(@,37/@9@ '*9@8@*@3@ 723/$(3/*,(2@ '2@ 3@ 8/<@ *7'3*'2@ *@3@ ,/*$&@ *@*7/@ */'@ /@ ,$2&@ 9@92@ 1<@'*3@ '9$<@.7/@ &,$2@ @ *'2/$@ 23(@39'@3&@(@3@(23*/2@*@,/2'3<@&*'#<2@2*&93@*&> ,/$@ 3*@ 3@ 23@ 4:'@ 3@ $'2@ *@3@ */2@ (@ 3@ /'*/*2@ p *3/@9*/2@3@&,% 2@33@ 9@&<@*'@<@2*8/@(@'&$@33@ 92@'3/@&*'> #<@'*/@7&'@73@92@,*3'3$$<@,$@ *@*&(@3@'23*/@*@*3@

CRITICAL TERMS FOR MEDIA· STUDIES.
Edited by and
W. J . T . M I T CH E L L MARK B · N · HAN S EN

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS

ChicagoandLondon.

.

.

'l'htt University of Chicago Press, Chicago 6o637 'l1htl Univeraity of Chicago Press, Ltd., London (I!) :1010 by The University of Chicago

All rlght!lo reserved. Published 2010
Printed In the United States of America
18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10

1 2 3 4 5

ISDN·13: 978-o-226-53254-7 (doth)
UIDN·10: 0·226-53254-2 (doth)

IIJDN·:L3! 978-o-226-53255-4 (paper) ISBN·:LO! 0-226-53255-0 (paper)

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Critical tenfis for media studies I edited by W. J. T. Mitchell and Mark
Hansen.

p. em. Includes index. ISBN-13: 978-o-226-53254-7 (doth·: alk. ·paper) ·. ISBN·:LO: o-226-53254-2 (doth: alk. paper) ISBN·13: 978-o-226-s3255-4 (pbk. : alk. paper) liBN·:J.o: o-226-53255-o (pbk. : alk. paper) Ljt<1ratureand tedmology. 2. Art and technology. 3· Technology4· Digital media. 5· Mass media. 6. Image (Philosophy). J. T. (William John Thomas), 1942- IT. Hansen,
Ma~ckBori·· N>cola),1965-

the minimum requirements of

,....

Contents
Introduction · W. J. T. Mitchell and Mark B. N. Hansen vii
AU'I'tiUT!CS

l Art · Johanna Drucker

3
19

I Body · Bernadette Wegenstein

I Image · W. J. T. Mitchell 35 4 Materialij:y · Bill Brown 49
Memory · Bernard Stiegler, with an introduction by Mark B. N. Hansen
.i l>'. . c . ,,·

64

Caroline Jones 88 '" ~1m.e anCI Space · W. J. T. Mitchell and Mark B. N. Hansen 101
. ,.··· ·

J. T. Mitchell and Mark

ilorne·:liil' · Eugene Thacker

117

j,mlmllni·cation · Bruce Clarke 131

¥bjlrnetl·:s · N. Katherine Hayles
llfcmrtatlion · Bruce Clarke 157

145

ogy. 3· Tec~ology age (Philosophy). z- II. Hansen,

Media · Mark B. N. Hansen 172 ... Hardware/Software/Wetware · Geoffrey Winthrop-Young 186 · : , 'l'eehnology · John Johnston .199

II Bxchange · David Graeber
2009030841
tm requirements of
~nces-Permanen~e

217

l8 Language · Cary Wolfe

233

1'1
992.

Law · Peter Goodrich 249

18 Mass Media · John Durham Peters 266 Ill Networks · Alexander R. Galloway 280 10 Systems · David Wellbery 297

111 Writing · Lydia H. Liu
Contributors 327 Index 331 ·
J

310

21

WRITING

A bone, a pebble, and a ramskin ... Thus an inventory ofprimc>rdlaj, jects that James Joyce evokes in his novel Finnegans Wake to dis:tirlgu writing from other media. The setting forth of writing in this draws our attention to the stark muteness of three-dimensional or ~a-dimensional surfaces which all inscriptions begin and This insight is worth pondering 1"sofar as it permits us to reckon the biomechanics of writing as a, technology. But is writing not a tern of representation like other visual and verbal codes? Yes, no doubt about it, and we will address the symbolic function ofwr:iti in__,due course. As we. launch int9 the subject, it is iinportimt to in mind that first and

d\

to" microchips. writing involves at least paring material. surfaces on which signs are to of coordinating the human motor skills (or prosthetic robot arms) quired to make the inscription.· In the age of informatics and c:on1p11ter' technology, writing increasingly penetrates the biomechanics of human llj?eech to the extent that sound, including speech, is n 0w being turned ipto an artifact, ·a notable exan1ple being texHo-speech (TTS) synthe,, ~j.$·~4lte colossal amount of written and printed record and electronic inQpnap.on stored in data banks, libraries, museums, archival centers, and u(:onlmunication networks further indicates how much the techpf writing and print·have evolved to shape modem life and the if.~lurnaJrtity,with major inlplica~ons for our planetary and inter-

unthinkable without writing.' This'tomm0n observareevaluation of the concept of civilization itself (and tli!~S l>eyond the scope of this essay.4 Insomuch as the pf}f)'ritingis always evoked, explicitly or implicitly,

as a positive index in the ranking of human societies and their intellec-

tual attributes, we need to come to a basic understanding of what writing is and what it does and ask why the stakes are generally very high in
LYDIA H. LIU

discourses on this subject. 5 In this essay, we identify and discuss six key :registers concerning writing and consider their implications for unde!standing politics, technology, histoqr and socjoeconomic organizatio~:

(1) How much do we know about the origins of writing? Is the question
of origin inevitable and important? (2) In what sense is literacy central to political governance and imperial projects, past and present? What kinds
of sodal, territorial, and political control are exercised on a population by

'

I

ory of primordial obIS Wake to distinguish
Titing in this manner

'e-dimensional tokens .ptions begin and end.
.mits us to reckon with ut is l"Vfiting not a sys-

rbal codes? Yes, there is bolic function of writing It is important to keep it
· and foremost as a tech- · · ations, empires, long-

pzation possible. From day '' It a twofold process of pre· )defa:e to be inscrmed and . prosthetic robot arms) re·
·,>···.}flnformatics and computer

·ithe biomechanics of human
:; speech, is now being tamed ,text-to-speech (TTS) synthe.
inted record and electronic 1

,kiting.' This common .i concept of civilization its·elf(an il'" of this essay. 4 Insomuch as ys evoked, explicitly or implic:it

the ruling class, the state, or empire through writing? (3) By what script and visual medium is writing to be known or knowable? How do alphabetical and nonalphabetical writing, on the one hand, and mathematical and cryptographic symbols, on the other; compare in the context of a broader semiotic conception of the visual/verbal/ spatial production of meaning? (4) How did writing evolve from antiquity to the invention of print and mass media? This bears upon the technological dimensions of writin'g that open the dialectic of orality and literacy to fortlier inquiry in . light of mechanical (re)production$ of the audiovisual sensorial contioc uum. (s) Is writing a visual represe*tation of speech? This familiar issue brings a "itumber of different positidJ:!S into play, including structural linguistics, metaphysics, and grammatology; our discussion will highlight the relevance of these positions to some of the other registers treated in this essay. (6) Finally, in what ways does digital media transformthe idea of alphabeticil writing to take us where we are, or into what media theorist Marshall McLuhan termed global village"? The past century has Witnessed spectacular archaeological discoveries that makeit easier than ever for scholars to map out the writing systems of the world and hypothesize their origin~. Whereas the iconographic origin of writing is widely observed across civilizations, scholars disagree . as to how one might interpret ancient iconic signs, such as petroglyphs or Amerindian pictographs, as instances of writing. The beginnings of Mesopotamian writing, or proto-cuneiform, are commonly dated to the end of the fourth millennium BCE, the first consonantai alphabet in , Phoenida to 1200 BCE, and the adoption of alphabets in Greece to 750 BCE.6 Direct archaeological evidence suggests that a we:Jl-cie,·ei<lpe:d torr~. of Chinese writing already existed in the last quarter of the second lennium BCE.7 The evidence brought to ~ght thus far has given good reason to believe that the earliest scripts were invented in· different parts of the four maracterized by urbanization, and a Mesopotamia, Egypt, China, and Mesqamerica,

"a

,,

0

cation by means of conventional visible marks," sees iconic signs precursor to full writing systems and terms such signs "s,,m,>si<)gral Florian that a major shift took

on however, rule out the consideration of graphic movement or a "syntactic" standing of graphism.) The widespread use of the rebus principle in logographic developments would have corresponded to this coJlCe:pt~ shift. 10 In general, scholars who are keen on developing a general of writing on the basis of linguistic theory have tended to downplay importance of iconicity and to treat non-language-related im;taJOCE!B c graphism as nonwriting.11 The majority of them insist that, regardless scripts, all full writing systems (broadly classified as alphabetic, sylla~~ logographic, or phonographic), must meet the criterion of adE!quate netic representati'on oflanguage. 12 Is this view of writing defensible the standpoint of media and semiotic considerations? Since ou:riuomedl ate focus here is media and writing rather than phonetic symbolism rowly conceived, it behooves us to open the issue to broad social beyond the horizons of linguistic representation. The issu:eofphonoc<en l(risrn is" something we will deal with later, but suffice it to rnentio;, the anxieties role the West

,./J

312 · LYDIA H. LIU

ystem of human intercommun i sees iconic signs as tf1<· .ms such signs "semasiograph.s_''li :onceptual shift took place wh('ll 1egan to be differentiat~~: from .1 name of the object-' (Coulma:;':; 1properties, however, appears 111 tovement or a "syntactic" undf'l use of the rebus principle in ear! y corresponded to this conceptlloll 1 on developing a general conn·1H ory have tended to downplay ! he 1n-language-related instances (d. of them insist that, regardless 11! 'classified as alphabetic, syllabi< 1 c.---· eet the criterion of adequate pho is view of writing defensible from Jnsiderations? Since our immedt~ ,efthah phonetic symbolism' tlftf· n the issue to broad social viatu
~marks,"
~

generation to another, writing was highly esteemed in Its nesh, the elephant-faced god of wisdom, was credited wlt:h tion of writing and is said to have broken off one of his tusks a pencil. 15 These legends bear witness to the magical power of writing and thw upheavals caused by its introduction into societies previously domt..· nated by oral communication, but they tell us little about how and why writing emerged. Since no direct means exist that will give us firsthand knowledge about prehistoric langoage and the origin of writing, scholars have speculated on the basis of available evidence or by analogy with so-called primitive or preliterate societies in the present day. Of the multifarious theories they have advanced, Andre Leroi-Gourhan's paleontology of writing ,offers some of the most interesting theoretical specula-tions to date. In his hook Gesture and Speech, Leroi-Gourha.n examines the evidence of excavated fossil anthropoids preceding Homo sapiens to gather clues about their tool-making and symbol"making activities. Dating what he calls "~birth of graphism" among the late Palaeoanthropians to roughly 35,000 BC!j, he notes neurological linkages between the ·-hand/tools an~e/laz.""lguage, as well as their simultaneous participation in the construction of communication symbols:
Humans, though they started out with the same_formula as primateS, can make tools as well as symbols, both of which derive from the same process or, rather, draw upon the same basic equipment in the brain . ... As soon as there are prehistoric tOols, there is a possibility of a prehistoric language, for tools and language are neurologically linked and cannot be dissociated within the social structure of mankind. (>993, U3)

.f--"-

'1; of writing is necessarily " logical evidence and by '.hinges on the existence how and why writtins ilizations appear to

·Lerol-Gourhan believes that graphism and langoage have never been mutually exclusive, just as gesture has always paralleled speech in the development of mind and language. This insight appears ta anticipate the notion of arche-writing (arche-l'ecriture) that Derrida would develop later, which c.;;;_tests the predbminant view that writing is a secondary · symbolic system vis-a-vis speech.'6 More importantly, Lerpi-Gourhan's ~phasis on the mutual embeddedness of human labor and symbol of"the w.e must pose is, Were the prehis:-. . con<Jitions of labor, symbol making, and social organization that ?n1:rilmt:edto the evolution of humans and their civilizations (see chap, "Memory")? To this question no one has a definitive answer, angles provided by the question itself may guide us tOJI'la,J:d ''""~ ~<·1llllldeJ:s1:im<lin,g <>f observable traces of comparative conditi<).l!l,l

The magical power attributed to writing by the mythological accounts we have observed provides some useful hints as to how theo .. era tic and imperial authorities in ancient Egyptian, Sumerian, Chinese, Mesoamerican, and other ancient civilizations might have exerted con· trol or monopoly over the written sign and written document. Just as literacy is about access to power and upward social mobility in modern society, "\!Vliting in ancient civilizations marked. the social division be..

\.

i£'1 oJiY \~~~

~ 1V ~t? tween those who had access to knowledge and power and those who did '\, ~~C not. The complexity of social organizationsin Egyptian, Babylonian, and \f Chinese civilizations-often associated with record keeping, accumu.. lated wealth, religious power, commerce, law and treaty making, and so on -conferred special prestige upon writing and, by extension, scribes. Priests, who were often scribes, sometimes held a monopoly of know!· edge through which they dominated the organizations of political power. Whe'lHammurabi completed the transition from Sumerian script to Ak· kadian and made the Semitic language official, he claimed that he had re· ceived the laws from the god of justice in order to subordinate the eccle· siastical establishment to civil courts. 17 Insomuch as writing as social practice camiot be separated from re~ ligion, law, politics, and Commerce, it is inextricably associated with the emergence of new spatial/temporal configurations and new forms of geopolitical consciol)sness (see chapter 7, "Time and Space"). If "the city as a form of social. organization is unknown among oral cultures," writing is so much more linked with empire making, because spatial expansion and bureaucratiC Centralization presuPpose efficient ~Ommuni cation across long distances.18 Harold A. Innis sugg~sts that the monarchies of Egypt and Persia, the Roman Empire, and the city-states should be understood as products of writing (Innis i972, 10). In China, writing was the first thing that drew the attention of the first emperor, Qin Shi . .! Huang. of the Qin Dynasty (221-206 BCE), upon his suc~essful imperial cpriquest. The emperor outlawed a multiplicity of scripts that had ex! lilted before his. rule and uftposed a standard script (the squarO-bloclc . Li!&l!racters still in use today), standard orthography (the'minor zhuan, or .'·.~~A).c;c~Ugraphy} and .standard legal codes and bureaucratic procedures, 4!.bng~tb.l!l'\!.fg~m weights .and me'asure, unlfer:q:r cpinage, rmiform imper~:tl~a~~tl;l~;·arid soon,~llin the·service~fcentralized rule; Thus beganzp;\1io*il'fulf:ni\wom"l!lenn,laioliimperial)listorlography in China, an unbrokenlre¢6j@.!ilitqwe1a~g,worldcivi!izations. This deep historiography wouldJ!fav~l6'~j;Uil,'tili~kable:outside of a teXtual tradition supported by success!veclzn.:fll!rial\rule andacstandard written script." . Weights, measures,· and;eu'ri'encypresuppose accurate numerical notation and record keeping, which appear to have played a seminal role
3J.4 · LYDIA H. LIU

I

i

® · ·········
5 6 7 8 9 --:....:.:.m..~:~:

0

1

2

3

4

------=
15 16

==---· ·········
17 18 19

10

...:.....:.&..sr.:.s:u
The Mayan vigesimal numerical system consists of three symbols: a dot (one), a dash (five), and a shell (zero).

11

12

13

14

ln the development of ancient writing. The striking predominance of numerical notations-using pebbles, tallies, tokens, and clay containers (bul/ae)-in some of the earliest recorded commerdal transactions, ···. which date back ten thousmd years, has caused some theorists to view mathematics as the earliest precursor to writing.~ Rather than evolvIng, as many suppose, from pictograph to syllabic writing and then to phonetidzation, writing systems could have emerged from a much more complex set of semiotic situations than the single need to record human speech. This conjecture is tangentially supported by the etymology of the Phoenician word spr, to which the English word scribe (and its Latin ro?t and Greek equivalent) can be. traced. The Phoenician word descended ·originally from the verb to count and did not j'cquire the meaning to write untillater.21 This shared ancestry for "inscription" and "counting" sheds Interesting light on the alphabet as an alphanumerical system inaddii tion to being a phonetic tool. In ancient Greek, as in other ahcientwriting systems, the function of the alphabet was already constrained by therequirement of mathematics, because the twenty-four letters of the alphabet plus three additional alphanumeric signs (digamma, koppa, sampi) notated unspoken mathematical concepts based on the enneads of the Egyptian numerical system. In.short, the twenty-seven Greek characters
were part of a total semiotic universe of writing-a11:d reasoning. that en-

compassed phonetic representation 'but went well beyond it. 22 In ordinary parlance; ~alphabet" is used interchangeably with "script" on the one hand and "writing system" on the other. It is helpful to maintain careful distinctions among these terms to avoid contusion when we discuss writing. For instance, when the Greeks adspted the conventional P_hoenirian Semjtjc consonantal aiM-abet and Cypriote syllabary to their spoken language, what they imported into·Greek was not a writing sysf<which·they created a new writing systeffi: tem b By Coulmas's definition, writing·systems are langnage-spe c w ere scripts typically are not-therehave be!!n faifewer scripts than writing systems .in the world. A script may coiricide with a single writing system,

such as the Korean phonetic script Han'gul, which is used for no other

language, but the opposite is often true. The Devanagari script in India,
to take an example, is used for a variety of languages, such as Hindi, Ne-

pali, and Marathi. Alternatively, Hindi and Urdu are virtually the same spoken language. but Hindi is written in pevanagari whereas Urdu is written in Perso-Arabic script. 23 The (Chinese) square-block character script has been adopted to create a great variety of writing systems in Asia: Japanese, classical Korean, Vietnamese, among others, including some obsolete ones. The Roman alphabet, in the course of Christian evangelization and modern colonialism, has been adapted to numerous languages in Africa, Asia, and the Americas. For instance, the Wade-Giles system

and, more recently, the Pinyin alphabet (with twenty-one consonants and fifteen vowels/diphthongs)-used to transcribe the phonemes of written Chinese characters for the purpose of standardized translation,
school pedagogy, and, increasingly in our time, access to global "elec-

tracy" (literacy in electronic media), whiCh is primarily coded in English -are not themselves writing systems but notational scripts based on the Roman alphabet. , From the viewpoint ofbiomechanicmedia, the dissemination of writing has been accompanied by an impressive variety of instruments of

inscriptio~, ranging from bones, shells, clay, bronzes, stone, papyrus,
parchment, bamboo, silk, wood, brushes, quills, and ink, all the way to the invention of paper, print or typography, and chips for electronic processing. Different mediums have no doubt made their imprints on writing, reading, and bo(>krnaking. Tsuen-Hsuin Tsien suggests that the predominantly do"!!lward strokes of written Chinese characters and the vertical, right to left,· arrangement of lines have to do with the material and tools of writing before the invention of paper in China in 105 CE. The hand holding the writing brush (by a right-handed scribe) was constrained by the grain of bamboo and wood surfaces and by the narrow strips,which allowed only a single line ofcharacters.:' Likewise, Egyptian hieroglyphs, when chiseled on stone monuments, were carefully formed and decorative in shape when compared with writing on papyrus, which peinlitt;ed cursive or hieratic forms to develop and accommodated rapid W:rltirtg (Innis 1972, 16). Papyrus, parchment, and paper each gave rise to . .c·rn·s of manuscript culture that have greatly affected the. forms organization in history." Commenting. on the-Roman Emi_s· :~uE:gests that "the written tradition. dependent on papyrus >ll::sUI>pa·rtE!d an emphasis on centralized bureaucratic admin~lji~re:a~ ]pat:chment as a medium in medieval Europe helped l'ia·mc>hc>poly of knowledge through monasticism. 26 The ¢p·po:lyv,.as greatly wealcened by the introduction of pa-

'lll'"

'gu/, which is used for no other
The Devanagari script in India,

per and printing from China, which led to the rise of vernacular literatures and nationalism in Europe. 27

of languages, such as Hindi, Nend Urdu are virtually the same ~vanagari whereas Urdu is writ) square-block character scri!Ji: of writing systems in Asia: Japng others, including some obourse of Christian evangeliza-

The spread of Buddhism in China prompted the invention of woodblock printing early in the eighth century. Large-scale productions of printed books and their dissemination across Asia facilitated widespread
socioeconomic transformations that would eventually sweep across the

lapted to numerous languages tance, the Wade-Giles system

·wiY:t twenty-one consonants
1

transcribe the phonemes of

' of standardized translation ' time, access to global "elech is primarily coded in Engbut notational scripts based a, the dissemination of write variety of instruments. of

y,

bronzes, stone, papyrus,

rills, and ink, all the way to
IOd chips for electronic pro~de their imprints on writrsien suggests that the prec lrinese characters and the 've to do with the material paper in China in 105 CE. · t·han:ded scribe) was conrtaces and by the narrow ters. 24 Likewise, Egyptian its, were carefully formed titing on papyrus, which f'ld accommodated rapid ~paper each gave rise to reatly affected the forms ling on the Roman Em,dependent on papyrus ed bureaucratic adminledieval Europe helped gh monasticism. 26 The the introduction of pa-

whole world~ Movable tvJ?e was invented in China in 1041-1048 CE.': Interestingly, besides the printing of Buddhist scripture, this technology was adopted in the printing of the earliest paper currency, within decades of the invention of paper money in China around this time, which suggests that the standardization and serialization of metal type also served the needs for the organization and control of early modem economy in Asia. 29 Following the introduction of paper manufacture to Europe, block prints also began to appear in European cities in the latter part of the fourteenth century as a result of the westward expansion of the Mongol Empire. The adaptability of the alphabet to movable type and large· scale machine industry translated gradually into the rise of universal _Aif·~acy, newspapers, vernacular fiction, advertising, and new forms of .-/ trade and politics. Observing th!' tremendous effects of printing on the transformation of psychic and social life in Europe and elsewhere, Marshall McLnban pointed out in The Gutenberg Galaxy that "the invention of typography confirmed and extended the 11ew visual stress of applied knowledge, providing the first uniformly repeatable commodity, the first assembly-line, and the first mass-production."30 The mechanization of scribal art introduced a new level of "repeatable precision that inspired totally new forms of extending social energies :'31 In English literature, as W.. J. T. Mitchell d,emonstrates in Picture Theory, this typographic imagination gav~ rise to William Blake's innovative poetic idiom and "a visible

language of graphic and typographic signifiers",(1994, 129). Writing and its relation to visuality lie at the heart of a long-standing phil<;\sophical discourse on writing, scripts, language, repres~ntation,' and truth in the West." In Phaedrus, Plato's ambivalence about writing· shows up in his distrust of visual arts in general and his fear that ing might supplant or destroy memory (which, not surplisinglly,,;ant;i~ pated the kinds of anxieties that followed upon the introduction in fifteenth-century Europe and the personal computer inour.time fantasy about downlgading the human mind or memory mt:o ·t:n!j puter resonates with that fear). The aa'c~a~·d~e~n~tial~~~~~i hieroglyphs 'in the eighteenth century gave parative spin to the discourse on visuality and Wliting.ca: the course of and
33

than on, the history of writing began to assume an evolutionary guise or what Mitchell characterizes as "a story of progress from primitive picture-writing and gestural sign language to hieroglyphics to alphabetic writing 'proper"' (1994, 113). Thus, Jean-Jacques Rousseau hypothesized In The Origin of Language that "the depicting of objects is appropriate to a savage people; signs of words and of propositions, to a barbaric people, and the alphabet to civilized people." 35 Dr. Johnson called the Chinese 1 'barbarians" on a sliding scale of evolutionary progress for the reason that "they have not an alphabet."" The superiority of the alphabet to pictographic, syllabic, and ideographic scripts is generally attributed to its unique ability to represent speech." ../ This colonial, evolutionary theory of writing has posed numerous obstacles to a dear understanding of the relationship among visuality, writing, and language. Not only does it misrepresent nonalphabetical writing as a failure in the teleological mard1 toward.phoneticization, but it simultaneously obscures the process whereby alphabetic writing has evolved as an alphanumerical technology from antiquity to the rise of informatics. As we know, alphabetic letters are no less visual symbols than nonalphabetic writing but, compared >yith the latter, are mud> easier to learn and to reproduce. The linearity, simplicity, and analytical powers of alphabetical writing have facilitated its dissemination around the world, although the same phonetic function is also capable of suppressing the spatial, ard1itectori.ic~ cilld-gesturaJ. dimensions of h~an communication. T~he mod:ernist poet Ezra Pound saw the limitations and tried to mitigate them by incorporating nonalphabetic d1aracters in his English verse. Depending on how one frames the issue and what social functions one expects writing to fuifill, $ere are advantages and limitations to both alphabetical · and nonalphabetical forms of writing that need not be elaborated here. From .the hindsight of informatics, the sing)llar advantage enjoyed by j alphabetical writing over nonalphabetic writing is the algorithmic po, tentials of alphabetic letters with respect to cryptography, ·machine, and mathematics; whid1 overshadow its mud> tOl-\ted power of phoneticiza. tion '!Jith respect to hum,an communication. If the sin1pJtcity of phonetic rej>reserttationwere the telos of~uman cOmmunication, then literature, and ·rhetoric would have been superfluous to the malcing of civilip~albioJns,.but the same simplicity greatly aided the invention of Morse le,-ilnf·Drtnatics, and mad1ine language, which we will discuss below. ·the. ambiguous status of alphabetical letters with regard to and modem often

.ry guise
rimitive

inherited much of the phonocentrism of earlier European evolutionary theories. In the Course in General Linguistics (first published by his stu·
dents in 1916), Ferdinand de Saussure inaugurated structural linguistics. "

>habetic :hesized
1riate to

formalizing a systematic al5fr0ach to the study oflmguage with an emphasis on synchronic structUre. The linguistic sign, in his definition, con-

" .

people, 2hinese
reason

ttopicd to its
JUS

ob-

y, writ-

vriting simullvedas n.atics. alphaand to >etical
~hthe
archi~

sists of a signifier and a signified. The signifier is a discrete linguistic el1 ement, such as the sound unit known as the ·phoneme," or a graphic <;<( '· .(\ image, but it primarily assumes the material aspect of the sign in the~ form of a sound image. The signified consists of a conceptual image or , ~ j\V t'( idea which is arbitrarily fixed onto the sound image, arbitrarily in the 1 sense that no natural correspon4ence exists between so~nd and concept. ~t;J The relation between signifier and signified and their relation to other signs within the system determine the differential value of each sign. According to Saussure, synchronic analysis can shed important light on the diachronic understanding of language change as well: Let there be.no mistake about the meaning that we attach to the word 'change'. One might think that it deals especially with phonetic changes undergone by the signifier,. or perhaps, changes in meaning which af, feet the signified concept. That view would. be inadequate. Regardless of
what the foUeS of change are, whether in isolation or in combination, they always result in a shift in the relationship between the signified and the signifier. 36 :

nAvf'l

f"(jl\! fils,

)V>j..,;_tlf' ;I:/' ·

'modem by
~ding

:writ·tical I>ere. ~d by
' ~po-

fand

This insight enabled Saussure to analyze linguistic meaning as a differential function of the signifier and the signified rather than as a result / of natural correspondence between symbol and idea. This. powerful eJ<, planator}'model enabled,the French anthropologist_Q.ande I Ovj Stianss to'launch st~\lctural anthropologwwhich would transform the discipline of anthropology in i:he West for several,decades.' In.structural anthropology-as in linguistics; speech is.primary, suggesting immediacy, Pl"I'S~ ence, identity, and authenticity, whereas writi'!g, a secondary system of
represfntation, figures defermen~. absence, difference, and inauthen-

i:izaietic lire,

,vi!iprse

w.

I to
;...._..:_
~ro

lOg.

~o

pas
I

ticity (eve!l though Saussure was not unaware of instances of writing such as the rebus; the anagram,-and the written letter). Derrida dubs the structuralist's preoccupation with phonetic inscription ·logocentric" and discerns in its operation ·a supplementary logic that simultaneously exdudes writing from tbe linguistic system and relies on alphabetical writing to enable phonemic aruuyses.39 JBut writing persists in ,spite of the linguistic sipt1. Jacques Lacan troubles the Saussurian sign byperfoniung a psychoanalytical reading of the signifier in his famous seminar 0\1 Edgar Allen Poe's detective story "The Purloined Letter," He demonstrate!' that the stolen letter in the
Writing · 319

~

story signifies and circulates among the various agents without the help
of any particular signified. As a pure signifier, the letter's movement,

displacement, and retrieval alone can support the full weight of a fictional drama about royal intrigues and detective interventions. 40 Poe, of

course, had been fascinated by cryptographic code and other pure signifiers in his time. The central enigma of another of his celebrated stories,

"The Gold-Bug," for example, presents itself as a textual problem: How to crack an unknown code to find the hidden treasure? Curiously, the code-handwritten on a piece of parchment-consists of not only familiar numerals, letters, and punctuation marks but typographical symbols (*, ~.f. t, etc.) that would have been rare or nonexistent in manuscript (parchment) culture but are abundant in typography-whicli was the medium of Poe's story. Friedrich Kittler's contention that Lacan's theoretical apparatus was indebted to the evolution of modern media technologies might easily be extended to explain Poe, whose passion for typography and cryptoanalysis anticipated the arrival of information theory in our own time. For Lacan, the symbolic enjoys the status of typography, whereas the real and the imaginary correspond, respectively, to phonography and film (Kittler 1999, 18). In the other words, the typewriter, gramophone, and film provide the conceptual and technological framework within which Lacanian psychoanalysis begins to make sense. · · Kittler reminds us further that Nietzsche "changed from argrunents ' to aphorisms, from thoughts to puns, from rhetoric to telegram style" when he became the first philosopher to use a typewriter (1999, 203). Through print and electronic media, alphabetic writing has .come to dominate the world of communication. McLul1an was quick to grasp the implications of this development and·tef!Oed the phonetic alphabet a "cool. and uniform visual medium"rfor good reason. 41 Intuitive refiect:ion,s .on the function of the phonetic alphabet seem to support the in1pression that letters stand for the sounds of speech. But what sounds? C. K Ogden, the ar~tect of BASIC English along with the literary critic I. A. Richards, once complained about the irregularities of phonetic represen" taqon in English, stating that ''the vowels represent not 7 sounds but 54,.the 26letters of the alphabet giving a total of 107 v.jlues, or with the \'owel digraphs ('each', 'ou', etc.) and multigraphs ('eau', etc.) 28o." Com1\l~.dirtg the burden of 280 sound.values and their various combinatoare tlj.e statisticalhu~dles at the level of English vocabulary. "To ail these in a v<:'c.abularyof 2o,ooo words, or even 2,ooo," says l·.i"'1~c·es·oitattes an am<?,unt of drudgery which has given phonetilyocat·es of synthetic languages their opportunity."42 contested theory of which discrete units of speech <in·phon<,ticall}' be represented by which letters (as in the

case of /ks/, written as one letter, x, in English), there is also the cognitive question of how the written code relates meaningfully to the linguistic image in the mind. In a cybernetic leap of faith, Norbert Wiener and his colleagues experimented with the idea of bypassing both hearing and vision so that deaf-mutes could arrive at instant comprehension of verbal signs through touch rather than gesture. Their experiment brings to mind Rousseau's description in The Origin of Language of how traders in India conducted business by taking each other by the hand, varying their grip in such a way as to perform secret transactions in public, unobserved by others and without uttering a single word. 43 That is to ~ say, sight, hearing, and speech need not to be present for communica=_&' tion.to take place. Wjener's experiment rested on a similar premise about communication, except that it also involved a translation of acoustic signals in the form of physical vibrations in the air, which, fed through a tactile device, would correspond to an experience of meaning in the recfiver's mind.44 Even so, Wiener's sensory prosthesis begs the question of how the tactile code relates to the conceptual processes in the mind. Cryptography and information theory tried to get around the cogni" tive issue byworlcing exclusively with alphanumerical symbols in a math·'e'matical remapping of communication. Alan Turing and Claude Shan.non unifonnly took the printed letters d£ the English alphabet as therr cpoint of departure. Shannon, the inventor of information theory, approached English as a statistical system, which he termed "Printed Enc glish," and subjected alphabetic writing to algorithmic thinking and engineering on behalf of informatics. This peculiar English is comp,;sed of the twenty-six-letter alphabet (A to Z) plus a twenty-seventh letter that mathematically codes "space." In otherword'e, Printed English is an ideographical alphabet with a definable .statistical structure. As a postphonetic system, .-it functions as a conce tual interface between natu I:ingU.age and .Wam;_ue:Jan.gJrqge This postphone c co · tis predicated on the symbolic correspondences between the twenty-seven letters and their numeral· counterparts in lieu of mapping the letters onto the phonemic units in. the spoken language. The alphanumerical correspondence not only facilitates the encoding of messages in information systems but also enables a rethinking of the idea of communication. The centrality of printed S)llilbol for tei:hnology has something to do with the · fact that; to use Friedrich A. Kittler's words, "in contrast to the flow of handwriting, we nowhave discrete elements separated by spaces" (1999; 16). The "space" symbol in Printed English is a conceptual figure, ·l)!>t<!'; viSible Word divider as is commonly observed in some WYiti;tlgs)'o!l:~i'1J The sign. may showup as a negative value or as the visible abo;encec ters, but.the twenty-seventh letter is just as likely to bem>>tll.&l

0

~

represented by "o" as by one or two types of electric pulse on a transmission system. This lett~r owes its existence to the statistical. rather than
visual-or phonemic, parameters of symbols. It has no linguistic insofar as conventional semantics is concerned but it is fully funcoonal

me~ning

as a meaningful ideographical notion.
Nietzsche made a prescient remark in 1.878: "The press, the machine,

the railway, the telegraph are premises whose thousand-year conclusion no one has yet dared to draw.''4S As one of the most significant inventions since World War II, Printed English is a direct offspring of telegraphy because it is based on a dose analysis of Morse code conducted by Shannon himself. In his pathbreaking essay "A Mathematical Theory of Communi_cation" published in the Bell System Technical Journal194B, shannon lrud the statistical foundation of information theory. Two years later, he published another article called "Prediction and Entropy of Printed Eng~sh," _which further elaborated the experimental work in co_nnecti_on With his work. These studies suggest numerous connecttons w:tth ·. 'Shannon s code work in World War II when he had investigated the statistical aspects of alphabetic writing i~ cryptoanalysis and helped design secrecy systems at Bell Laboratories for the U.S. military. As a discrete, i~eo~aphic symbol, Shannon's twenty-seventhletter is meanin~ preasely m this cryptographic sense. As if mJrroring cryptography, Prmted English has a corresponding, transJated teXt in numerical symbols. The original t~t "with an alphabet of 27 symbols, A, B, ... z, spa~~· ha_s been tran~lated mto a new language with thealp~abet 1, 2, ... 27· This_ c~nceptton lays the theoretical foundation for what would become digttal computer science. Through a built-in of Printed English achieVes its ultimate embodiment m the mathematical figuring of o/1 binary opposrttons: . In our time, the alphabet seems more thoroughly and universally digtc tal has been. Be it word processing, digital imaging, genetic

~arlier

tedmo~ogyin nume~cal ~slation,

mechani~m alph~ ~d~o-grap~c

neenng,

~nit en~ intera~tive games, or simulated. and actual warfare; we are liv-

ing in the midst of a digital revolution that is dissolving conceptual . boundaries and introducing new ones. Digital media transform contemporary.dvilization by turning one of the oldest technologies-alplutbetitwriting-into a universal coding system to unlock the mind and s.ecret of life itself (see chapter s, "Biomedia"). It seems that the spatial/ . c~ordinates of our future cognitive world will eVo~ve in~o ever tnsifiE·d of hll]J'{an and machine or sitnilar kinds of ~etiic:~·oncliti<>ns enabled by digital media. But a§ Mitchell's discusrrredia in chapter 3 suggests, "digital imaging may be ano.ther layer of the perceptible cognitive world that we

ol~er

~e

tnterdependenc~

~~:ge~ami

l'tl!U'ha11in1g al.ways been

there."~

hitto,
~ulun

ttlonu

.ly b~ mnon

to "nking of alphabetic writing as a phonetic system of transcription that Shannon's treatment of the English alphabet as a total ideographic (~gorithmic) system rna me as a s o t t e same time, · g:t-t technology is converting nonalphabetic writing systems such as Chinese into a kind of subcode of global English. Once again, a tower of Babel is being erected on the promised land of universal communicability, machine translation (MT), or machine-aided translation (MAT), a dream that is forever haunted by the memories of a not so distant oracle.

inn on
ter, ho

mmu·

Notes
1. The six-dot matrix within which characters are differentiated in Braille is a formal mechaniSm that relies on spatial rather than visual arrangement. For a discussion of writing as the organization of graphic space, see Harris, Signs of Writing {1995, 45). 2. TIS, a branch of artificial intelligence, is one of the areas where the relationship between . writing and speech can be fruitfully investigated for both engineering and theoretical purposes. See Richard Sproat, A ·Computational Theory ofWriting Systems {Cambridge: Cambri~ge

~e sta·
esign

/s with

~dEn· ~ction

University Press, 2000).

· 3. The shared Chinese and Japanese kanji word wenming rcivilization .. ; litera tty, .. illumination through text"), with its positive emphasis on

wen or "text/textuality, .. brings .out the

·etymology of writing more forcefully than the Latin equivalent. civilis. 4. For helpful reference on the subject, see Jack Goody, The Domestication of the Savage

been ~is con.. digital /falpha/graphic #ons.47 hllydigiltic engi~are livnceptual rcontemc-alphaHand the

Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 197().

I

5. For example, Jacques Derrida discerns a'n inh~rent ethnOcentrism in anthropologic~l discourse on writing in his reading of "A Writing Lesson;· by Levi-Strauss in which the latter describes -his fieldwork among the "innocent.. Nambikwara tribe. See «The Violence of the Letter: from Levi-Strauss to Rousseau .. in Derrida, OfGrammatology, trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 19'11), pp.101-40. 6. The Phoenicians are often credited as the inventors of the alphabet. M. O'Co,nnor ~rgues, however, that "the Phoenicians did not "invent' the alphabet. A variety of scripts (and peoples) were invOlved in the diffusion of the alphabet arOund the region, even if the Phoenicians played a majOr role in the process ... See Peter T. Daniels and William Bright, eds., The
WorldS Writing_ Systems (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), 96.

7. A vocabulary of mo[e than four thousand written characters and/or ¥'JOrds has been brought to light by archaeologists: These were inscribed on the oracle bones used by the royal houses· for divination and are rega'rded a·s the royal archiveS of the period. Only abouthalf of.th~ characters have. been successfully decoded thus far. From the evidence of these oracle bone inscriptionS; it is clear'tl)at-the.earliest beginnings of Chinese writing go ffiuch' further back, but there is considerable controversy over the dates due to the lack of dire~t' archaeological evidence. Much of thiS ctlntrove·rsy·also hinges on how one views Recently, the journal Antiquity published a field report by archaeologist Li

~spatial/

iinto·ever t kinds of !'s discus,lgmaybe ldthatwe
~cal func-

Xueqiin··uidl h

Chiliese and American collaborators, who speculate tentatively that __,the ·aritiqtrit}inese writing might be dated to the seventh mitlennium BCE. Li Xueqin et'aL · Writing? Sign Use in· the Seventh Millennium BC at Jiahu, Henan
J

Pr<>vir1ce,: Ottirto

77,

no,

295/2003]: 31-44. For representative works on this subject, see David N. Keighttey,

"The Origin of Writing in China: Scripts and Cultural Contexts," in The Origins of Writing, ed.
Wayne M. Senner {~incoln: University of Nebraska Press, 19891, 170-202.

J

8. I. J. Gelb, A Study of Writing (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963). Gelb provides
some of the most infl4ential taxonomies for twentieth-century theories of writing anti

coined the term grammatology, which Derrida later adopted in his philosophical work. See also Coulmas, The Writing Systems of the World (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1989), 1.

9. See Coulmas. Writing Systems: An Introduction to Their Linguistic Analysis [Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003), 192-96.

10. The ter~hich was Gelb's coinage, means word writing. It is widely adopted

to distinguish a written sign that transcribes a word unit rather than a sound unit in speech. The rebus principle involves a process of phonetic abstraction whereby the graph of one word is borrowed to transcribe another word on the basis of homophony although the two words are semantically unrelated. A modern example in English is "U2" used as shorthand for "you, too" or "you two."

11. For a systematic critique of the mutual exclusion of picture and word in the West. see
Mitchell, (19941, esp. chaps. 1-3.

12. John DeFrancis has been one of the.most vocal defenders of this view. See his book Visible Speech: The Diverse Oneness of Writing Systems '!Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press,
1989}, especially the chapter NA Critique of Writing about Writing," 211-47.

13.-lt bears pointing out that in Plaio·s account, Socrat~s also attributed the invention "of
number. arithmetic, geometry, an.d astronomy, of games involving draughts and dice" to the deity Theuth. See Plato, Phaedrus,- trans. Robin Waterfield (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 68-69. ,,, For analysis of earty Chinese. legends about lhe origin of writing. see William G. Boltz;

The Origin and Early f!evelopmentpfthe Chinese Writing System..(New Haven: American-Oriental Society, 1994), 129-38.

15. Coulmas, Writing Systems of the World, 5. 16.1n a footnote to the preface to Of'Grammatology, Derrida states tha_t-the ffrst part of his
book, 'Writitig before the Lett~r," was originally written in 1965 as an es.say in response to the publication of three important works, one of which was Leroi-Gourhan's Le geste et La

parole H965).

17. See-Innis (1972, 31-:--32). For the impaCt of writing on the .concept of "law" and "justice,"

See Jon Stratton, "Writing and the Concept of Law in Ancient Greece," Visible Language 14,
no. 2 {1980), 99-121.
~8·. CclUIImas,Writing syStems of the World, 7.

a detailed study of the .role of writing in early imperiC!l China, see .Mark .Edward

uvm·~n·10 an_d Authority inJ:hin~ {Albany: State Universi~y of_ New York Press, 19991.
l;le_rri'at, Science _in History, 4 vols. (London: C. A. Watts: 19-71), 119. See . also 1dt-Bes!;er.at,MThe Earliest PreCursors of Writing," Scientific Amet:ican, ,238

"l#.s sc;:ribes phoenico-puniques," in Phoinikeia .G'rammi3ta, ed. Cl. Baund 'i(,:e:,;n,gs{N<lm<Jro So~iete des Etudes Classiques, 199_1 ), 150.

'P:s:ycfioy·bsi('JihecFo;rg0tten Art of lsopsephy and the Magic Number KZ.~

24. Chinese recorded history indicates that Cai Lun !Ts'ai Lun/, an offlelal of lh@

lmp~l'lfd

court, first reported the invention of paper to the emperor in the year 105 Cl!, but rt!Gitl11 !if· chaeological findings place the actual invention of papermaking a couple of hundred ytHtft1 earUer. Tsuen-Hsuin Tsien, Written on Bamboo and Silk: The Beginnings of Chin<J!Jt? Bookf4 and
Inscriptions !Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 2004), 204.

25. Parchment is made from the treated hides of calves or sheep; papyrus is a naturnl prod· uct, sliced from the stem of the papyrus plant; and paper is manufactured by chemica:! pw· cess from rags or plant fibers. For a detailed account of the invention of paper in Chlnll, tHlh Tsien, ~Paper and Paper Manuscripts," in Written on Bamboo and Silk, 145-74. 26. See Innis (1972, 107, 135]. 27. Innis mentions that "Greeks began to use paper in manuscripts in the twelfth century and Italians in the thirteenth century, but it was sparingly used, in spite of the very high cost of parchment notably in the thirteenth century, until the fifteenth
century~

(1972, 138-39).

28. Bi Sheng lor Pi Sheng, ca. 990-10511 employed clay types when he first invented movable type. Historical documents suggest that wooden and metal types began to appear In Ch!n!'l as earty as the thirteenth century, although surviving prints from prior to the four· teenth century are rare. By the fifteenth century bronze movable type had been widely adopte"d in China·and Korea, but for aesthetic, technical, and socioeconomic reasons, mov· able type could not compete with the popularity of block prints in China until the end of the nineteenth century. For an account of the rise of early woodblock printing to the spr~ad of ··printing from movable type as w~ll as Gutenberg's exposure to this technology before 14.56, see Joseph Needham's series Science and Civilization in China, specifically vol. 5, pt. 1,
Pap:rand Printing by Tsien Tsuen-Hsuin ICI'Imbridge:.Cambridge University Press, 1985),

201-22,313-19. 29. For up-to-date and detailed research, consult Pan Jixing's book .in Chinese, Zhongguo jinshu huozi yinshua jishu shi [A history of'metal movable type arid printing teChnology In China] (Shenyang: Liaoning kexue jishu chubanshe, 2001). 30. Marshall Mcluhan, The Guten.berg .Galaxy: The Makitig of Typographic Man (Toronto: University of .Toronto Press, 1965),124. 31. Marshall Mcluhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994), 172. 32. Derrida's meth.od of. ~_econstruction in OfGrammatology has _centered on this problem. 33. For Derri~a·s insightful reading ofthis fou~p.ationat text. see .. Plato's Pharmacy, .. in Dis· .semination, trans. B-arbara Johnson (Chi.cago: University_ of. Chicago Press, 1981), 61-155. 34. Walter Ong, Orality and Lit;racy: The Technologizing.,ol.the Word tN~W York: Routledge, 19821.80. 35. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, On' the Origin of Language, trans. John H.. Moran and Alexander Gode (Chicago: University of ChicagO Press, 1966), 17.1ronically, the decoding of the Rosetti Stone (1799) .twenty yea.rs after Rou~seau's de~th relied on the p~onetic principle fthe \f'i bus) tor its success, after pictographic interpretation had come to a dead end. "'36. James Bos'«ell, ~ife of Johnson, 6 vots., ~d. G. B. Hill and L. j=. Powell (Oxford: O.xford University P_re.~~. ·1934), 3:33~. ~s ·quoted in David Porter,ldeographia.IStanford, CA: Stan.._ ford University Press, 2001), 76. 37. This. view is also shared by Mcluhan in Understanding Media, 83-84. 38. See Ferdinand de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics, tf"an·s. Wade· Baskin fNtW York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1966); ?4-75.
Wr!~ng

·

39. For Derrida's critique, see ''Linguistics and Grammatology" in Derrida {1971, 27~73}. ·By no accident did Roman Jakobsen and Claude LE!vi-Strauss follow the same logic in their
subsequent development of structural poetics and structural anthropology. They privileged speech and linguistic systems and treated their object of analysis, whether poetry or society, as a closed system of relations governed by rules. For Derrida's reading of Levi-Strauss and Rousseau, see "'Nature, Culture, Writing" {ibid., 95-140).
40. Jacques Lacan, "The Purloined Letter,"' in The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, book 2, The Ego

in Freud's Theory and in the Technique of Psychoanalysis, 1954-1955, ed. Jacques-Alain Miller, trans. Sylvana Tomaselli {New York: W. W. Norton, 1991}, 191-205.
41. McLuhan, Understanding Media, 84.

42. C. K. Ogden, Basic English: A General introduction with Rules and Grammar {London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., 1935}, 21. BASIC (the acronym stands for British, American, Scientific, International, and Commercial) consists of a vocabulary of 850 common Eng !ish words.

43. Rousseau, On the Origin of Language, 9-10. 44. Norbert Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings (New York: Da·Capo Press, 19501, 168-70. 45. Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Hurrian: A Book for Free Spirits, trans. R. J. ~o!ing
dale (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986]. 378. 46. Claude Shannon, "Prediction and Entropy of Printed English, Journal, January 19Ji1, 56. 47. For a detailed acCount of Shannon's work, see my article "iSpace: The Theory Machine after Joyce, Shah non, and Derr]da ... Criticallnquiry32 (spring 2006]: 516-50.
H

aeu System Technical

References a11d Suggested Readings
Bernal, Martin: 1990. Cadmean Lette'rs: The Transmission of the Alphabet to the Aegean and Furth"er West before 1400 B.C.

Win~na Lake: EisenbiBuns.

Coulmas; Florian. 2003. Writing Systems: An Introduction to Their Linguistic Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Derrida, Jacques. 1971. Of Grammatology, trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak. Baltimore: JOhns Hopkins University Press. DOnald, Merlin. 1993. Origins of the Modern Mind:. Three Stages in the Evolution· of Cultur.e and Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Piess. Hards;"Roy. 1995_. SignS of Writing. ·London: 'Routledg~. I Harold A. 2007. Empire atid Communications. Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield. Fr1edrieh:_1999; GramoPhone, Film,· TYpewriter, trans. Geoffrey Winthrop:.. YoUng arid Wutz. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

i'OI'·iloUit·an, Andre. 1993. GestUre and Speech, trans. Anna Bostock Berger:. Cambridge,
T:1994. Picture Theory. ChicagO: University of Chicago Press.
:ee,~Sier.i,t. Denise. 1997. How Writing Came About. Austin: UniVersity of Texas·

You  are  here:  Home  ->  17.03,  Lead  Story,  Volume  17  ->  What  Should  We  Call  Reading?   Mara  Mills  /  New  York  University

What  Should  We  Call  Reading?   Mara  Mills  /  New  York  University
Posted  by  Mara  Mills  /  New  York  University  on  December  3rd,  2012  No  Comments  Printer- Friendly

Optacon  text-to-tactile  converter,  c.  1964 I.  Digital  Decoding  and  Literacy A  reading  environment  of  iPhone-books,  text-to-speech,  information  retrieval,  screened verbovisuals,  prompt  texts  and  textlinks  demands  its  own  theories  of  decoding  and  meaning- making.  In  I  Read  Where  I  Am,  a  compilation  of  "notes"  by  82  artists,  designers,  and  authors  on human  attention  and  intake  in  the  "new  information  culture,"  Anne  Mangen  (National  Centre  for Reading  Research  in  Norway)  defines  digital  reading  as  potentially  multimodal,  multimedial,  and multisensory:

Reading  has  diffused  to  a  virtually  limitless  variety  of  processes  and  practices  with  an  equally  endless variety  of  texts.  How  and  to  what  extent  are  existing  theories  and  models  of  reading  able  to  explain what's  going  on  when  we  read  the  kinds  of  dynamic,  interactive,  ephemeral  texts  that  appear  and disappear  in  an  instant,  as  in  instant  messaging  and  Twitter  ...  Another  challenge,  hitherto  unforeseen and  hence  largely  neglected,  is  the  role  of  the  reading  device  itself  ...  Reading  should  perhaps  be reconceptualized  as  a  multisensory  engagement  with  a  display  of  static  and  dynamic  configurations, implemented  in  a  device  with  particular  sensorimotor,  ergonomic,  affordances  which  in  different  ways interact  with  perceptual  cognitive  processes  at  play.1

Configuring  the  Reader,  from  Marshall  McLuhan's  The  Medium  is  the  Massage  to  the iPhone Reading  has  always  been  a  roomy  word,  although  even  in  Old  English  its  definition  was  split between  "decoding"  and  "interpretation."  Recent  digital  technologies  provide  new  metaphors  and means  for  theories  of  reading;  neuroscientists  have  taken  over  the  investigation  of  decoding,  while literary  and  media  scholars  rethink  interpretation.  In  the  discourse  of  neuroscience,  the  activity  of reading  is  miniaturized  to  a  "chain  of  processing  stages"  that  occur  between  the  retina  and  the  rest of  the  brain.  As  Stanislaus  Dehaene  explains  in  his  definitive  Reading  in  the  Brain,  the  goal  of research  into  the  neural  basis  of  reading  over  the  past  three  decades  has  been  "to  crack  the `algorithm'  of  visual  word  recognition--the  series  of  processing  steps  that  a  proficient  reader applies  to  the  problem  of  identifying  written  words."2  The  focus  has  thus  been  on  print  reading, refigured  as  a  variety  of  machine  reading. In  literary  and  media  studies,  many  theorists  have  analyzed  the  "configuration"  of  human interpretative  practices  by  digital  media  and  machine  reading  protocols.  Others,  such  as  Katherine Hayles  and  Stephen  Ramsay,  argue  for  layered  reading,  with  human  interpretation  extended through  machinic  aggregation  or  filtering.3  In  either  case,  signal  and  interface  transformations  have encouraged  new  bodily  habits  and  forms  of  attention  related  to  reading:  scanning,  searching, linking,  liking,  clicking,  selecting,  cutting  and  pasting,  navigating,  sharing,  skimming,  looking, glancing,  accessing,  multitasking,  mining,  and  pattern-recognizing.  At  a  more  abstract  level,  these techniques  have  suggested  new  interpretive  modes:  distracted,  distant,  shallow,  surface,  social,

synthetic,  collaborative,  and  hyper-reading. Like  the  cognitive  approach  to  decoding,  there  can  be  something  functionalist  about  these  new theories  of  interpretation,  by  which  I  mean  that  human  behaviors  are  presented  as  functions  of media  affordances.  Apart  from  social  reading,  many  of  these  strategies  are  radically individualized,  foregrounding  a  user  and  a  personal  device.  In  "How  We  Read,"  Hayles recommends  an  expanded  definition  of  reading,  with  a  focus  on  proficient  interpretation  (i.e. literacy):

Literary  studies  teaches  literacies  across  a  range  of  media  forms,  including  print  and  digital,  and  focuses on  interpretation  and  analysis  of  patterns,  meaning,  and  context  through  close,  hyper,  and  machine reading  practices.  Reading  has  always  been  constituted  through  complex  and  diverse  practices.  Now  it  is time  to  rethink  what  reading  is  and  how  it  works  in  the  rich  mixtures  of  words  and  images,  sounds  and animations,  graphics  and  letters  that  constitute  the  environments  of  twenty-first  century  literacies.4

Still  missing,  as  argued  by  Mangen,  is  a  semiotics  for  multimedia,  a  way  to  join  considerations  of perception  and  interpretation.  Also  neglected  by  many  of  the  literary  models  is  the  context  of  digital literacy  itself,  the  question  of  reading-for.  The  "we"  constituted  through  reading  or  implied  by particular  devices  is  another  point  of  contention. II.  After  Inkprint Today's  crisis  in  the  definition  of  reading  was  presaged  in  the  last  century  by  a  similar  set  of debates  about  print  access  technologies  and  alternate  reading  formats  for  blind  and  print  disabled people.  As  a  result  of  the  medium's  growing  ubiquity  and  ties  to  the  requirements  of  citizenship, exclusion  from  print  began  to  be  seen  as  disabling  in  and  of  itself.  The  notion  of  "print  handicaps" became  common  in  the  library  field  after  1966,  when  Public  Law  89-522  extended  the  Library  of Congress  Books  for  the  Blind  program  to  those  with  any  impairment  or  cognitive  difference  who were  "unable  to  read  normal  printed  material."  Unlike  dyslexia,  medically  defined  as  an  impairment of  the  brain,  the  category  of  "print  disability"  focuses  attention  on  the  built  environment  (i.e.  media) rather  than  physiology. According  to  the  neurotechnological  paradigm,  if  the  goal  is  fast  and  efficient  reading,  print  may  be essentially   impairing.  Dehaene  writes,  "Eye  movements  are  the  rate-limiting  step  in  reading.  If  a  full sentence  is  presented,  word  by  word,  at  the  precise  point  where  the  gaze  is  focalized,  thus avoiding  the  need  for  eye  movements,  a  good  reader  can  read  at  staggering  speed--a  mean  of eleven  hundred  words  per  minute."5  He  suggests  a  screening  technique  known  as  Rapid  Serial Visual  Presentation  (RSVP)  to  inhibit  the  eye's  movements,  or  saccades,  and  he  conjectures  that "perhaps  this  computerized  presentation  mode  represents  the  future  of  reading  in  a  world  where screens  progressively  replace  paper.  At  any  rate,  as  long  as  text  is  presented  in  pages  and  lines, acquisition  through  gaze  will  slow  reading  and  impose  an  unavoidable  limitation."6 The  modern  literacy  imperative  in  the  United  States  prompted  the  development  of  dozens  of  new formats--aural,  tactile,  olfactory,  visual--  by  which  blind  and  other  print  disabled  people  could read.  "Inkprint  reading"  became  one  among  many  possibilities,  starting  with  raised  print  and  Braille in  the  nineteenth  century  and  joined  in  the  twentieth  by  phonographic  Talking  Books,  Radio Reading  services,  and  a  variety  of  electronic  scanning  devices  for  translating  print  into  tones, Braille,  vibrations,  or  speech.  (One  such  scanning  device  is  the  Optacon,  featured  at  the  opening of  this  post.)  Talking  Books  and  Radio  Reading  are  only  available  to  readers  with  a  medical certification  of  disability,  hence  I've  classified  them  as  "prescription  media."  Formats  like  Braille were  historically  critiqued  by  sighted  people  for  accentuating  the  differences  between  themselves

and  the  blind--or  for  being  "separatist"  media.  For  many  blind  readers,  on  the  other  hand,  Talking Books  seem  to  embody  a  philosophy  of  normalization. In  some  cases,  these  new  formats  were  marketed  to  multiple  audiences--an  example  of  what Graham  Pullin  calls  "resonant  design"--connecting  otherwise  distinct  groups  through  shared technical  needs  or  enthusiasms.7  Libraries  began  loaning  microfilm-based  "ceiling  book  projectors" to  so-called  "bedfast"  individuals  in  the  1940s.  By  the  next  decade,  the  high-tech  family  was  also recruited  into  the  imagined  readership  of  projected  books.  Through  accidental  design convergences,  artifacts  with  similar  interfaces  or  outputs  might  also  provoke  resonances  between seemingly  dissimilar  user  groups;  in  a  recent  letter  to  the  New  York  Times,  disability  theorist Rosemarie  Garland-Thomson  proposes  that  Autocorrect  has  destigmatized  the  idiosyncratic diction  generated  by  speech  recognition  software.

"Ceiling  Book  Projector  for  Bed-ridden  Patrons"  of  the  East  Baton  Rouge  Parish  Library (c.1940s)

"Electronic  Home  Library,"  Book  Projector  Accompanied  by  Electronic  Voice  (1959) Reading  is  an  event  that  occurs  between  bodies,  devices,  symbols,  and  environments--if  any  of these  vary,  reading  changes.  Confronted  with  so  many  new  reading  formats,  librarians,  educators, and  psychologists  throughout  the  twentieth  century  began  to  revisit  the  old  decoding-interpretation definition  of  reading  (which  in  the  U.S.  had  generally  been  elaborated  to  three  stages:  phonics  or text-to-sound  decoding,  word  comprehension,  and  interpretation).  Was  listening  to  audiobooks,  for instance,  reading  or  just  an  "aid  to  reading"?  What  of  print  decoded  by  Deaf  readers,  for  whom phonics  was  irrelevant?  Could  Braille  and  tonal  codes  be  considered  "writing"?  If  speech  itself  was an  encoded  signal,  how  did  it  differ  from  writing? These  queries  continue.  In  2006,  the  National  Accessible  Reading  Assessment  Projects  offered three  definitions  of  reading,  which  successively  decenter  "writing"  and  "decoding"--but  not  "text":8

Definition  A Reading  is  decoding  and  understanding  written  text.  Decoding  requires  translating  the  symbols  of  writing systems  (including  braille)  into  the  spoken  words  they  represent.  Understanding  is  determined  by  the purposes  for  reading,  the  context,  the  nature  of  the  text,  and  the  readers'  strategies  and  knowledge. Definition  B Reading  is  decoding  and  understanding  text  for  particular  reader  purposes.  Readers  decode  written  text by  translating  text  to  speech,  and  translating  directly  to  meaning.  To  understand  written  text,  readers engage  in  constructive  processes  to  make  text  meaningful,  which  is  the  end  goal  or  product. Definition  C Reading  is  the  process  of  deriving  meaning  from  text.  For  the  majority  of  readers,  this  process  involves decoding  written  text.  Some  individuals  require  adaptations  such  as  braille  or  auditorization  to  support  the decoding  process.  Understanding  text  is  determined  by  the  purposes  for  reading,  the  context,  the  nature of  the  text,  and  the  readers'  strategies  and  knowledge.

As  reading  becomes  multimodal,  it  cannot  be  defined  as  a  bodily  function;  it  is  rather  a  "sphere  of activity"  like  play.  Theories  of  digital  reading  must  similarly  grapple  with  the  multiple  formats  for written  text,  the  relationship  of  words  to  other  signs,  and  the  routes  (whether  neural  or  strategic)  by which  decoding  occurs.  As  these  theories  evolve--following  Garland-Thomson's  logic--perhaps "accessible  reading"  will  no  longer  be  set  apart  from  reading  per  se. III.  On  the  Same  Page As  a  human  invention,  reading  is  necessarily  social  and  political.  In  the  schooling  context,  this goes  without  saying;  accessible  reading--like  all  reading--has  long  been  tied  to  "discipline." Literacy  instruction  poses  "good  reading"  as  purposeful  and  relatively  coherent,  an  access-to

something  else  (e.g.  employment  or  the  "common  culture"  of  a  nation).  As  a  mode  of  relation  to objects  and  to  other  people,  reading  is  not  just  benignly  "communicative":  it  can  be  exclusive, extractive,  and  enrolling;  it  can  be  unsettling  or  emulsifying.  Although  distinctions  between  print  and electronic  "cultures"  are  endemic  to  media  studies  (as  in  the  claim  that  digital,  networked technologies  encourage  remixing,  multitasking,  and  interactivity)  theories  of  digital  reading  have  yet to  adequately  connect  new  readerly  behaviors  and  modes  of  attention  to  questions  of  discipline and  political  economy. Studying  "mediated  congregation"  in  Protestant  mega-churches,  my  colleague  Erica  Robles- Anderson  asks  of  the  screened--and  often  distributed--worship  experience,  "How  do  we  know we're  on  the  same  page?"  For  the  case  of  digital  reading,  we  might  ask,  "What  does  it  mean  to  be on  the  same  page?"  Are  "we"  created,  as  an  imagined  community,  through  shared  content  across platforms,  or  through  shared  gestures  and  devices?  This  question  can  also  be  posed  for  low-tech multimodal  reading  formats,  like  the  print/Braille/Scratch  `n  Sniff  book  pictured  below.  Designed with  heterogeneous  readers  in  mind,  this  device  quite  deliberately  reformats  reading--and  also reading-together.9

A  visual-tactile-olfactory  book From  Catherine  Wires,  "Books  for  Children  Who  Read  by  Touch  or  Sound," The  Quarterly  Journal  of  the  Library  of  Congress  30,  2  (1973) Image  Credits: 1.  Optacon  text-to-tactile  converter,  c.  1964 2.  Configuring  the  Reader,  from  Marshall  McLuhan's  The  Medium  is  the  Massage  to  the  iPhone 3.  "Ceiling  Book  Projector  for  Bed-ridden  Patrons"  of  the  East  Baton  Rouge  Parish  Public Library 4.  "Electronic  Home  Library"  Book  Projector  Accompanied  by  Electronic  Voice 5.  A  visual-tactile-olfactory  book.  From  Catherine  Wires,  "Books  for  Children  Who  Read  by  Touch or  Sound,"  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  the  Library  of  Congress   30,  2  (1973).

Please  feel  free  to  comment. NOTES
1.   Anne  Mangen,  "The  Role  of  the  Hardware,"  in:  I  Read  Where  I  Am,  ed.  Mieke  Gerritzen,  Geert  Lovink  and Minke  Kampman  (Amsterdam:  Valiz,  2011),  106.  For  a  brilliant  series  of  explorations  into  the  long  history  of "interacting  with  books,"  see  Andrew  Piper's  Book  Was  There.  [] 2.   Stanislaus  Dehaene,  Reading  in  the  Brain:  The  Science  and  Evolution  of  a  Human  Invention  (New  York: Viking,  2009),  12.  [] 3.   N.  Katherine  Hayles,  How  We  Think:  Digital  Media  and  Contemporary  Technogenesis  (Chicago:  University  of Chicago  Press,  2012);  Stephen  Ramsay,  Reading  Machines:  Toward  an  Algorithmic  Criticism  (Champaign: University  of  Illinois  Press,  2011).  [] 4.   Hayles,  78-9.  In  How  We  Think,  Hayles  provides  an  excellent  summary  of  cognitive  and  humanistic approaches  to  digital  reading,  moreover  she  frames  the  latter  in  relation  to  a  broad  shift  away  from  the "hermeneutics  of  suspicion"  in  literary  theory.  [] 5.   Dehaene,  17.  [] 6.   Dehaene,  18.  [] 7.   Graham  Pullin,  Design  Meets  Disability  (Cambridge,  MA:  The  MIT  Press,  2009),  93.  [] 8.   F.  Cline,  C.  Johnstone,  &  T.  King,  Focus  Group  Reactions  to  Three  Definitions  of  Reading  (Minneapolis,  MN: National  Accessible  Reading  Assessment  Projects,  2006).  [] 9.   Combinations  of  print  with  Braille  or  raised  lines  were  marketed,  incongruously,  as  "twin  vision"  books.  In  the 1970s,  contemporary  examples  of  multimodal  reading  included  touch-and-feel  books  as  well  as  book-record and  book-cassette  combinations.  []

Schmidt Besser
+ start w tokens, physical representations
+ move to pictographic images

Fischer
+ purpose is communication
+ artificial marks
+ marks relate to programming
+ reading is about meaning, writing is about sound

Liu
+ iconicity vs phoneticism
+ can writing exist without sound?

+ phonocentricism - Derrida - there is a western bias to how we read and write - 
+ grapheme - smallest possible unit representing a sonic difference
+ phoneme - the sonic difference
+ that doesn't take into account non alphabetic languages
+ TEI - text encoding initiative


+ cybernetics - Ã¼bersystem to define all cultural, social, scientific systems as inputs and outputs
  - using cybernetics as input output loops
+ Turing - input output feedback loop
  - 



+ mrs people are reading and writing more are ever before
+ the technology and codes of writing have shifted
+ what distinctions matter and what distinctions don't in reading and writing
+ there's no way to talk about or codify reading in the same way we did in the past (mills)


+ what does to read in so many languages? to recite, calculate, recognize, read aloud, convince, gather, collect, etc. etc.
+ all these connotations are connected to physical practices
+ what does read mean to us todayWriting

WRITING

LEXIGRAPHY

SEMASIOGRAPHY

LOGOGRAPHY

PHONOGRAPHY

SYLLABOGRAPHY

(GRAMMATOGRAPHY) ALPHABETIC WRITING

THE CATEGORIES OF WRITING

Writing
Theory and History of the Technology of Civilization

Barry B. Powell

A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

This paperback edition first published 2012 © Barry B. Powell Edition history: Blackwell Publishing Ltd (hardback, 2009) Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing program has been merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell. Registered Office John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom Editorial Offices 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell. The right of Barry B. Powell to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher. Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books. Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Powell, Barry B. Writing : theory and history of the technology of civilization / by Barry B. Powell. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-1-4051-6256-2 (hardcover : alk. paper) ISBN 978-1-118-25532-2 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Writing­History. 2. Writing­Social aspects. [1. Alphabet­History.] I. Title. P211.P69 2009 411.09­dc22 2008046991 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. Set in 10.5/13pt Minion by Graphicraft Limited, Hong Kong 1 2012

Contents

List of Illustrations Maps Preface Chronology Introduction: A Difficult Topic, Little Studied, Poorly Understood 1 What Is Writing? 2 Writing with Signs 3 Categories and Features of Writing 4 Some General Issues in the Study of Writing 5 Protocuneiform and Counting Tokens 6 Origin of Lexigraphic Writing in Mesopotamia 7 Plato's Ideas and Champollion's Decipherment of the Egyptian Hieroglyphs 8 Egyptian Writing and Egyptian Speech

ix xiv xv xvii 1 11 19 38 51 60 70

85 100 108 120 128

9 The Origin and Nature of Egyptian Writing 10 "The House of Life": Scribes and Writing in Ancient Egypt 11 Syllabic Scripts of the Aegean

viii

Contents 148 163 175 187 206 227 245 255 263 270

12 The West Semitic Revolution 13 What Kind of Writing Was West Semitic? 14 The Origins of West Semitic Writing 15 Chinese Logography 16 Lexigraphic Writing in Mesoamerica 17 The Greek Alphabet: A Writing That Changed the World 18 Summary and Conclusions Glossary Bibliography Index

Chronology

9000 bc Widespread use of geometric tokens throughout Near East, c.8500 bc Appearance of complex tokens, c.4500 ­3400 bc 4000 bc Round clay bullae that enclose tokens, impressed with cylinder seals, c.3500 ­3400 bc Protocuneiform numerical flat clay tablets, sealed or unsealed, with impressions of three-dimensional tokens or imitations of token shapes by means of a stylus, c.3400 ­3300 bc; first logograms with numbers c.3300 bc ProtoElamite writing, c.3300(?)­3000 bc Egyptian hieroglyphic writing, Pharaonic civilization emerges, c.3250 bc 3000 bc EARLY BRONZE AGE Tokens disappear, c.3000 bc Sumerian cities flourish in Mesopotamia, c.2800­2340 bc Texts in Sumerian cuneiform that reflect order of words in speech; similar development in Egypt, c.2800­2400 bc Minoan civilization flourishes in Crete, c.2500­1450 bc Akkadian Empire in Mesopotamia, c.2334­2220 bc; Akkadian cuneiform Linear Elamite writing, c.2150 bc Third Dynasty of Ur, c.2120­2000 bc "Cretan hieroglyphs," c.2100 bc­c.1700 bc 2000 bc MIDDLE BRONZE AGE Arrival of Indo-European Greeks in Balkan Peninsula, c.2000 bc Babylon's ascendance under Hammurabi, c.1810­1750 bc; Old

xviii

Chronology Babylonian cuneiform Old Assyrian cuneiform, c.1800 bc Cretan Linear A, c.1800 bc­1450 bc LATE BRONZE AGE Hittite Empire rules in Anatolia, c.1600­1200 bc; Hittite cuneiform; "Luvian hieroglyphs" West Semitic syllabic writing invented, c.1500(?) bc Destruction of Cretan palaces, c.1450 bc Destruction of the rebuilt Cnossus, c.1375 bc Amarna tablets in Middle Babylonian cuneiform, c.1350 bc Trojan War occurs, c.1250(?) bc Destruction of Ugarit, c.1200 bc Chinese script first attested in the Shang Dynasty on oracle bones, c.1200 bc IRON AGE begins with destruction of Mycenaean cities in Greece and other sites in the Levant Earliest Mesoamerican "writing," from Olmec territory, c.1140­400 bc Greek colonies are settled in Asia Minor, c.1000 bc NeoAssyrian cuneiform, c.1000 ­ 600 bc NeoBabylonian cuneiform, c.1000 ­500 bc NeoHittite cities flourish in northern Syria, c.900 ­700 bc Earliest "Isthmian" writing, c.900 bc (?) GREEK ARCHAIC PERIOD begins with invention of the Greek alphabet, c.800 bc Iliad and the Odyssey, attributed to Homer, are written down, c.800 ­775 bc Greek colonies in southern Italy and Sicily, c.800 ­ 600 bc Olympic Games begin, 776 bc Hesiod's Theogony is written down, c.775 ­700(?) bc Rome, allegedly, is founded, 753 bc Formation of Hebrew Pentateuch (first "five books" of Bible) during Babylonian Captivity of the Hebrews, 586­538 bc Cyrus the Great of Persia, c.600 ­529 bc "Zapotec" writing from the valley of Oaxaca in Mexico, c.600 ­ 400 bc Expulsion of the Etruscan dynasty at Rome and the foundation of the "Roman Republic," 510 bc

1600 bc

1500 bc

1100 bc

1000 bc

900 bc 800 bc

600 bc

Chronology 500 bc

xix

Late Babylonian cuneiform, c.500 bc­ad 75 Behistun inscriptions (Old Persian cuneiform, Late Babylonian cuneiform, Elamite cuneiform), c.500 bc CLASSICAL PERIOD begins with end of Persian Wars, 480 bc Herodotus, c.484 ­ 420 bc Thucydides, c.470 ­ 400 bc Plato, c.427­347 bc Aristotle, c.384 ­322 bc Alexander the Great conquers the Persian Empire, founds Alexandria 336­323 bc HELLENISTIC PERIOD begins with death of Alexander in 323 bc

400 bc

300 bc Earliest Mayan writing, c.250 bc Mouseion founded by Ptolemy II, ruled 285­246 bc 200 bc Ptolemy V carves the Rosetta Stone, 196 bc ROMAN PERIOD begins when Greece becomes Roman province, 146 100 bc Diodorus of Sicily, c.80 ­20 bc Vergil, 70 ­19 bc Augustus defeats Antony and Cleopatra at battle of Actium and annexes Egypt, 30 bc Augustus Caesar reigns, 27 bc­ad 14 Year 0 ad 200 Last Mesopotamian cuneiform, ad 75 Classic Maya Period, c. ad 250 until ad 900 Plotinus, a NeoPlatonist Greek philosopher writes that the hieroglyphs are allegories, c. ad 250 Coptic phase of pharaonic Egyptian recorded in modified Greek alphabet called Coptic script, c. third century ad Last hieroglyphs inscribed at Philae near Aswan, ad 396 European MEDIEVAL PERIOD begins with fall of Rome in ad 476 Hieroglyphics, by Horapollo (?), c. fifth century ad

ad 300 ad 400

xx ad 1500

Chronology

Hernán Cortés lands in Mexico, ad 1519 ad 1600 Mesoamerican writing disappears, c. ad 1600 Travelers' reports bring information about cuneiform to Europe ad 1700 MODERN PERIOD Rosetta stone found in Egypt, ad 1799 ad 1800 Jean François Champollion deciphers Egyptian hieroglyphs, ad 1822 Henry Rawlinson and others decipher Mesopotamian cuneiform, c. ad 1850 ad 1900 Michael Ventris deciphers Linear B, ad 1952 Yuri Knorosov establishes the phonetic basis of some Mayan signs, ad 1952

Introduction: A Difficult Topic, Little Studied, Poorly Understood

It is not hard to see that writing is the single most important technology in human life, yet it is not easy to study or to think about. Nonetheless we use it almost every minute of our lives. Naturally, many handbooks attempt to explain this extraordinary technology, some of good quality, but most suffer from a recurring blindness about what writing is, where it comes from, and how it functions in relationship to speech. All scientific speculation on the history of writing, without exception, is conducted by alphabet-users, including the present study, which gives a bias to our questions and to what we take as answers. Many historians of writing do not read nonalphabetic scripts or have a casual acquaintance with them. The alphabet-using historians of writing make prejudgments that harm our understanding. In this book I will struggle against such prejudgments by providing a scientific nomenclature for understanding writing built on a coherent model of the different internal structures that govern all writing. I want to explicate this nomenclature and this model (see diagram facing the title page) through the study of the history of writing in the ancient Mediterranean, China, and Mesoamerica. This book is not, then, a description of the endless variety of external form in the history of writing, for which good studies exist, but an examination through historical examples of the internal structural principles that govern all writing. By proceeding in this fashion through a dark forest filled with dragons, I hope to slay several and clear away some popular confusions:

· · ·

the illusion that the purpose, origin, and function of writing is to represent speech the common supposition that writing comes from pictures the misapprehension that writing necessarily evolves toward the goal of finer phonetic representation

2

Introduction: A Difficult Topic

A Chaos of Terms
In no sense is the history of writing a discipline with niches in universities filled by experts. Those who write about the history of writing come from different directions and bring with them the expectations of their own disciplines. Linguists occasionally write such books because they feel that "language" is their province and that writing is somehow language. They are unrealistic about the quality of the phonetic information encoded in systems of writing, and their explanations too often ignore the social and historical forces behind change in systems of writing. Archaeologists sometimes work directly with unfamiliar ancient scripts, but they are rarely trained philologists. Perhaps philologists are in the best position to study the history of writing, if they have learned a nonalphabetic script, because they have wrestled most with the problem of deriving meaning from symbols. Thus the Polish-American Assyriologist I. J. Gelb (1907­85), who worked at the University of Chicago and contributed to the decipherment of "Luvian hieroglyphs," wrote the most important analysis of writing in the twentieth century and laid the foundations for the modern scientific study of writing. His famous book A Study of Writing: The Foundations of Grammatology appeared first in 1952 (revised in 1963). Gelb was wrong in details, but he understood that the history of writing exists, with discoverable underlying principles, as in all historical study. His outline of those principles stands today, and I refer to them often in this book. Above all Gelb urged the use of a consistent and rational vocabulary in discussing the history of writing, although few follow his advice. In reading and thinking about writing we struggle with terms that have their origin in the history of study, not in the nature of the subject. For example, we just referred to "Luvian hieroglyphs" to distinguish this writing from "Hittite cuneiform," but there is nothing hieroglyphic about this writing except the casual and entirely superficial resemblance to the historically unrelated Egyptian hieroglyphs. Both scripts are iconic, that is, we can sometimes recognize in the signs objects from the everyday world ­ for example, a hand, a bird, or an animal ­ but there is no direct historical connection between the scripts and they work in different ways. Another example is the "Ugaritic cuneiform alphabet," which is unrelated to Mesopotamian cuneiform and is not an alphabet. Unfortunately, such terms have stuck, and we are stuck with them, and we are stuck constantly

Introduction: A Difficult Topic

3

explaining that this or that term is inappropriate. I will put such casual and inaccurate but common terms in "quotations." But the misuse of three words more than any others have harmed the study of the history of writing: "pictogram," "ideogram" (or ideograph), and "alphabet." The word "pictogram" means "picture-writing," but carries with it so much imprecision that we must avoid it rigorously. The use of "pictogram" should be the hallmark of the amateur, but careless professionals go on using it. It is always tempting to call any sign that looks like something a "pictogram," implying that the message is communicated through pictures and not through the resources of speech. Underlying the use but usually unspoken is a specious theory that "writing" began as pictures, then somehow became attached to speech, yet still remained pictures. So written characters that resemble something in the world, like Egyptian hieroglyphs, are called pictograms, as if the sign stands for what they picture and not for elements of human speech or sounds of speech. We do find representations of recognizable objects in early writing, but these "pictures" can fulfill a wide range of functions. Even when such designs appear to stand for the object represented, really they stand for the word attached to the object; that is, they refer to elements of speech, and not directly to items found in the world. "Pictures" can fulfill other functions, for example, place the thing described in a category. When wishing to speak of the representational aspects of some writings, we can call these aspects "iconic". A similar situation pertains to the word "ideogram," often used, for example, of Chinese characters or of a class of signs in Cretan Linear B. Ideogram should mean "idea-writing," that is, the graphic symbolization of an "idea," a Platonic, invisible, eternal, unspoken reality. At one time scholars thought that Egyptian hieroglyphs were just that. But Chinese characters never represent eternal, unspoken realities, and neither do Linear B characters. Probably "ideograms" do not exist, so it makes little sense to talk about them. The deep problems surrounding the word "alphabet" will be the subject of a good part of this book.

Writing, Language, Speech
Writing is old, but writing attached to speech, which I will call lexigraphic writing, goes back only to around 3400 bc, as far as we know. That is a

4

Introduction: A Difficult Topic

rough date, as are all dates in the fourth millennium, but one we can nonetheless work with. Immense changes have taken place in the art of lexigraphic writing since that time, as one will quickly discover if setting out to learn Akkadian cuneiform. Yet such changes rarely result from evolution, except in writing's earliest stages, and were never inevitable. They came about through the accidents of history and the intercession of individual men of genius working across racial and linguistic bounds, when fresh approaches were possible. There is no certain direction that a writing must take. Because writing systems are arbitrary and conventional they do not respond to nature (whose rules of behavior are not arbitrary and not conventional), but to the inventiveness of unknown creators, who had a purpose too often hidden from us. So improbable is it that anyone should devise a means of encoding elements of speech by means of graphic symbols that in the Old World lexigraphic writing was invented only once, in Mesopotamia, and perhaps a second time, much later, in China. But even in China the idea of "writing" must have come from Mesopotamia over the Gansu corridor north of the Himalayas, where caravan traffic was constant. China was never wholly separated from cultural developments in Mesopotamia. A separate invention did take place in Mesoamerica, providing a test case for principles distilled from the study of Near Eastern writing. We will spend one chapter on writing not attached to speech, which I call semasiography (after I. J. Gelb), but most of this book is about lexigraphic writing. Because such writing is attached to speech, we need a clear description of what we mean by speech. Unfortunately scholars often use "language" when really they mean "speech," as if they were the same thing. "Language" is a formal system of differences and by no means restricted to vocal utterances. In the language of speech, the spoken word "water" is not the spoken word "ice" because they have different forms, to which we attach different meanings. In the language of writing, Egyptian is not

, though, both transliterate as sny: the one means "two" and the other means "companion." Different meanings accompany different forms. Similarly, in the language of writing [$] means something different from [%] because they have different forms to which we assign different significations. These signs belong to the language of writing, and they refer to words, though they do not have phonetic value.

Introduction: A Difficult Topic

5

The broad category of "language" will also include Morse Code, semaphore, and American sign language, which may refer to speech, but can never be confused with it. Such forms of language as Unicode or mathematical notation do not refer to speech at all. In the study of writing we speak of the "underlying language" essential to deciphering an unknown script, so that we easily forget that writing is itself a kind of language. The confusion between "writing" and "language" is profound, ubiquitous, and disruptive, so that in a popular view Chinese "language" is the same as Chinese "writing," a confusion that turns out, oddly, to be true once we understand how little Chinese writing has to do with Chinese speech. Lexigraphic writing is based in speech, yes, but because we know of ancient speech only through written documents, it is easy to think that we are talking about "language" or "speech" when really we are talking about graphic representations that make use of spoken lexical elements, which may constitute in themselves a kind of language, but by no means intend to preserve actual speech. The intention is to communicate information, and for this purpose a graphic system with systematic phonetic ties to speech is a tool of earth-shaking power. It is not, however, a tool for the preservation of ancient speech. For this reason the Sumerian speech was of use to nonSumerian Semitic scribes, because the relationships between graphic symbols and symbols originating in speech had been established by ancient usage. Just so, it was logical and practical for medieval Europeans to use Latin as a basic system for understanding across the polyglot confusion of mutually unintelligible local dialects and languages. Sumerian written in cuneiform ("wedge-shaped") writing was a traditional system of signs for communicating information whether you were Sumerian or not, and as such worked well. For the same reason, during the dominance of Assyria over the Near East during the ninth to seventh centuries bc and of Persia in the sixth to fifth centuries bc, the West Semitic Aramaic script encoding lexical forms from the "Aramaic language" was used by nonAramaicspeaking scribes over an area stretching from the Mediterranean to northwest India. For example, in Figure 0.1, from the palace at Nineveh of Tiglath Pileser III (ruled 745­727 bc), one of the most successful commanders who ever lived, a beardless eunuch on the left calls out a list of booty while the presumably Assyrian-speaking eunuch in the middle records the inventory in the contemporary Assyrian dialect by impressing cuneiform characters with a stylus into a waxed wood tablet. The presumably Assyrian-speaking

6

Introduction: A Difficult Topic

Figure 0.1 Relief of bilingual scribes, from the palace of Tiglath Pileser III at Nineveh (in modern Iraq), c.740 bc. (London, British Museum BM118882.)

eunuch scribe on the right makes a duplicate record (to prevent cheating?) by writing on a roll of papyrus or leather, certainly West Semitic Aramaic characters tied to Aramaic speech. The difference in writing medium, part of any writing tradition, accompanies a difference in script and "underlying language." Lexigraphic writing may refer to elements of speech, but in real speech we find extraordinary local and social differences, so great among English speakers that TV interviews in a regional English are often given subtitles for the greater English-speaking audience; that is, by means of alphabetic writing the speech is reduced to a standard form. Even in the same town speakers may not understand one another across differences in class and social background, although they "speak the same language." In my own experience, once, in Alexandria, Egypt, my middle-class guide was unable to communicate with a street sweeper who may have known the location of our hotel, yet both spoke "Arabic." Only writing, and especially alphabetic writing supported by political power and social prestige, creates the illusion that a "language" such as English

Introduction: A Difficult Topic

7

is a single thing, out there, bounded, defined, and capable of discovery. Writing's overarching power stabilizes speech, represses local differences, and fashions standards for thought and expression. Dante's Florentine dialect was one of hundreds of local Italic vernaculars descended from Latin, but his written Commedia in a fourteenth-century Florentine dialect created "the Italian language." Many books speak of the Phoenician, Hebrew, Moabite, Aramaic, and Syriac "languages" when, really, they are looking at small variations in the forms of West Semitic writing applied over a broad geographical area to a single speech-family that we might loosely call "Semitic," with local differences based on a similar phonology (a selection of voice sounds) and a similar inner structure. For example, in Hebrew the word for son is bn and in Aramaic it is br, but in Cambridge, Massachusetts, spirits to drink are /lika/ and in Seattle they are /likor/. Still, spoken communication takes place. The imperative "carry!" is qabur in the Hebrew "language," qabor in Syriac, 'uqbur in Arabic and qabar in Ethiopic, but all are mildly different expressions from a single underlying system. The great family of Semitic languages has very many regional variations, and we are simply never sure when a dialect has slipped over into a new "language," that is, when a speaker within one system can no longer understand a speaker from another system. But twenty years of study of the holy Quran, certainly written in Arabic, will not enable the student to converse, even about simple things, with an inhabitant of Fez, Cairo, or Damascus, where everyone speaks "Arabic." The confusion is clear in Figure 0.2, a type of chart that appears in many books on writing. The chart catalogues the transformations undergone by the West Semitic signary (in which a hypothetical but wholly unproven priority is given to Phoenician script). Such graphic variations are taken as designating the different languages of "Phoenician," "Moabite," various forms of "Aramaic," and "Hebrew." But such different "languages" are as close to one another as Quranic Arabic is to spoken Arabic in its myriad and often mutually unintelligible varieties. It is true that, schooled in the Phoenician script of 1000 bc, one will have a hard time reading "Palmyrene Aramaic" of the third century ad, the script and language used in the caravan city of Palmyra in the Syrian desert, but these are nonetheless the same script with formal differences growing over more than one thousand years. The underlying "language" has remained the same. Such charts are really a study in handwriting, or paleography, with limited importance for understanding the theory and history of writing, and they do not describe an evolution of "language."

8

Introduction: A Difficult Topic

Monumental Nabataean Aramaic

Palmyrene Aramaic

Hebrew Ostraca (sixth century BC)

Early Phoenician

' b g d h w z h . t . y k l m n s ` p s . q r s t ^

Figure 0.2 Various character forms for West Semitic writing, from c.1000 bc to modern times. (After Healey, 1987, fig. 15, p. 223.)

In sum, the ambiguous correspondence of language and speech afflicts all such studies as this one, because speech, sometimes called "spoken language," certainly is a language, but not all language is speech. We will need constantly to speak of the "language" underlying systems of writing,

"Square" Jewish/ Hebrew Printed

Early Aramaic

Late Aramaic Papyri

Moabite

Introduction: A Difficult Topic

9

even if we really mean "speech." In this case by "language" we refer to a system of phonic symbols intelligible to speaker and listener, more or less, over a wide range of variation. However, that system of phonic symbols could never itself be the "language" of the lexigraphic writing, because lexigraphic writing is its own language, making use of the resources of speech but never identical with it. "To speak a language" means something ­ if you speak Greek, you may enter the Mysteries at Eleusis; if you don't, you can't. Nonetheless, language, speech, and lexigraphic writing are all tangled up and, once we acknowledge their boundaries and differences, we must to some extent live with the confusion.

Transliterations
In the case of writing that is related to speech we must constantly deal with reconstructions of the sounds of speech encoded in the writing. In talking about the forms of characters and the sounds of speech I will follow the conventional practice of using brackets [ ] to enclose a given form or shape, how something looks, how it is written, and slashes / / to indicate the sound. For example, in Egyptian hieroglyphs the sign [ ] represents the sound /m/ (plus an implied vowel). Unfortunately, each discipline has its own system, or more than one, for transcribing sounds, which originated in the history of the discipline. Such systems, internal to a discipline, are not themselves consistent, but may differ in England and Germany and even in the same place. For example, the Egyptian character for /y/ is written sometimes as [è] and sometimes as [j]. The situation is worse between disciplines. The glottal stop, when the throat closes as before and between "uh-oh," is represented as ['] in transliterations from West Semitic, but as [Ç] by Egyptologists, although the sound is the same. Ideally, everyone might use the admirable International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) as a means to suggest the sound values in systems of writing (see Fig. 14.3), and sometimes you do find this. However, few readers without formal training in linguistics understand the symbols of the IPA, the use of which can become a kind of game of phonetic precision that misrepresents the enormous phonetic ambiguity in all writing systems. Furthermore, the IPA is not easy to learn or to understand.

10

Introduction: A Difficult Topic

The problem of consistency in transliteration is not solvable, and in this book I have chosen, as much as possible, to use systems of transliteration traditional within a discipline, explaining myself as I go, but cautioning the reader about the need for flexibility and attention to sometimes subtle distinctions.

1

What Is Writing?

Writing, writing, it is everywhere, yet few have much to say about it, few know about it. Writing is an inherently difficult topic because discussion of it takes place by means of the very medium being discussed. As fish who know nothing of water, scholars who spend their lives studying different traditions of literature, and of writing, rarely reflect on the actual technology that makes their study possible: how it works, where it came from, and what relation it bears to other formal systems of thought. Writing is magical, mysterious, aggressive, dangerous, not to be trifled with. Although it takes many forms, it is always a technology of explosive force, a cultural artifact based not in nature (whose rules we did not create) but sprung from the human mind. Human groups who possess writing triumph over those who do not, without exception and swiftly. If humans had existed a year, writing was invented not even yesterday, but some time this afternoon, as far as we know. Writing cast a veil across the human past, separating the million human years that came before from the turbulent last five thousand years. In the brief period since the discovery in Sumer around 3400 bc of the phonetic principle in graphic representation ­ when conventional markings first represented sounds of the human voice ­ the cultures encoded in this and subsequent related traditions of writing have changed human life forever. Writing is the most important technology in the history of the human species, except how to make a fire. Writing is the lens through which literate peoples see the world, feel the world, hate the world, love the world, defy the world, and imagine change. What is writing that, like the lens you never see, creates the world? The difficult topic is muddled and mixed up with other things that have their own life ­ religion, artistic expression, speech, and human thought.

12

What Is Writing?

The Magic, Romance, and Danger of Writing
The holy Quran, encoded in the holy, even divine, script that the prophet himself used, is a sacred document that can never be changed or corrected or amended or mutilated or abused or transliterated into Roman characters: That would be an offense to God and punishable by death. Thus a book can be a fetish, as when one swears when placing a hand on a Bible or Quran: If the swearer is foresworn, he will suffer evil consequences. The text of the sacred Quran justifies mass murder, according to some interpretations, but you can never be sure because of the surprising obscurity of the wholly phonetic Arabic script, its distance from speech. What does it really say? The Jewish religion similarly depends on written documents in whose holy, magical, emotive symbols cabbalists discover secrets of the universe. Fortunately, the rabbi ("my master") can explicate textual obscurities to the ignorant, the less learned, as do the wise mullahs to the faithful. Ancient Egyptian civilization, too, was bound to the forms and expectations of hieroglyphic writing to an extraordinary degree. The conventions of hieroglyphic writing influenced the posture of statues and the shapes and layout of temples, and, in the revelator Akhenaten's sacred city of Akhetaten ("Horizon of the Aten," near the modern village of Amarna), the design of the whole city described the form of the hieroglyph for "horizon," over which the sun god daily rose. Egyptian writing could also make one live forever, a signal advantage. Mao Zedong (1893 ­1976), who pretended to hate the past, hoped to replace the obscurantist Chinese system of writing with an alphabet, but even his unlimited power could not accomplish the change. To change the writing would change the sacred ancient culture that the Chinese adore, which the mysterious and beautiful writing encodes. By changing the writing, one loses everything. That was precisely the intention of Kemal Atatürk when, in the 1920s, he outlawed the traditional Arabic script and ordered that Roman script now encode the Turkish language ­ thus did he break with the corrupt and ruinous past of the Ottoman sultans. Jesus wrote in the sand (John 8), but in stark wisdom left nothing behind for followers to kill themselves over. They found other reasons. He must have understood how writing, and writings, can lead to fanaticism, social division, oppression, and the tyranny of the mad and the intolerant over the common man. So great is the power of writing. We would like to know why writing has such exaggerated effects on human life and where it gets its power. The common definition of civilization as

What Is Writing?

13

"human life in cities in the presence of writing" may be a historical judgment, but it is also a speculation on the superiority of a cultural practice that symbolizes human thought and carries it beyond the place and time of its origin. Writing enjoys intimate affection with the human faculty to create symbols, when one thing stands for another. Without this faculty, we would not be human. The relationship between the sounds of human speech and graphic material symbols that represent such sounds in lexigraphic writing is a central problem.

A Definition of Writing
Writing is hard to see because it governs our thoughts, and hard to talk about because of the lack of consistent names for real categories. We know that writing is there to be read, but are not sure what we mean by "writing," so that it is fashionable in criticism to "read" works of art or to "read" Greek culture or manners of dress or almost anything, as if in understanding a work of art or a building or a social practice we are doing the same thing as when we read a text. Writing has been defined time and again, always in different ways, but let us say that writing is a system of markings with a conventional reference that communicates information, like the signs on this page. Where does such a definition take us? Because writing is made up of markings it is material (not spiritual or emotional or mental). The meaning of such markings, their conventional reference, we might say their intellectual dimension, never comes from nature, as does the human faculty for symbolization and speech, nor from God (as many have believed), but from man. The elements of writing, the markings, are related in an organized way, in a conventional way, in order to tell the reader something, to communicate with the reader. Where there is writing there is a reader who understands the system of conventions, even if the reader is God or a god (as often).

Change and Evolution in Systems of Writing
General principles appear to govern how any writing can work, as they appear to underlie the formation of speech. The possibilities of organization are limited and in some way predetermined. Hence, the history of writing is

14

What Is Writing?

a history of the discovery of these principles, drawn in intelligible patterns. Because systems of writing are conventional and exist by agreement rather than coming from nature or God, there is no right or wrong to how a system imparts its meanings. Systems of writing serve different purposes for different peoples at different times. It is wrong to imagine that the Bronze Age Mycenaean Greeks would have been better off with the later Greek alphabet or with Chinese writing or anything else. Linear B did what it was called to do, to keep economic accounts in a palace-centered redistributive economy, and no one required more. Nonetheless, because the history of writing is a history of discovery, we are tempted to compare writing systems as if they were in a competition for greatness and to say, for example, that the Greek alphabet is superior to Japanese writing, so complex that less than a dozen non-Japanese in the United States of America could read it when the Imperial Japanese Navy struck on December 7, 1941. Within the historical competition between human groups and the struggle for political and cultural dominion such comparisons are probably justified and fairly belong to an evaluation of the past. The Greek alphabet in its Roman form has in three thousand years become the dominant writing system by far, whereas Japanese writing remains confined to a small archipelago. Apologists for scripts unrelated to the Greek alphabet like to point out that it was not so much the Roman script as Western political power behind the script that brought the alphabet's hegemony, as if the script did not itself make possible (though not inevitable) such power. Because among the users of any writing the system will satisfy the needs placed upon it, we cannot expect to find improvement or radical change within a developed lexigraphic writing system except in its earliest stages of formation. Both Sumerian cuneiform and Egyptian hieroglyphs appear to undergo evolution in the several hundred years between the first clear evidence of phoneticization, c.3400­3200 bc, and the creation of texts that reflect grammar and syntax, c.2700 bc; hundreds of years more must pass before we find extended texts. We must, of course, depend on evidence from haphazard finds. In the Eastern civilizations of the ancient world, it was not so much that the scribes who developed the first complex lexigraphic systems served the power elite as that they themselves were that elite; once their systems were in place, they could hardly have imagined, let alone desired, developments that would simplify their systems and undermine their power, or even make them irrelevant in the scheme of things. The Egyptian schoolbook taught that one should

What Is Writing?
Be a scribe! . . . You are one who sits grandly in your house; your servants answer speedily; beer is poured copiously; all who see you rejoice in good cheer. Happy is the heart of him who writes; he is young each day. from Papyrus Lansing, c.1000 bc, a schoolbook (Lichtheim 1976: 173­74)

15

Yes, for
The scribe, whatever his place at the Residence [pharaoh's court], he cannot be poor in it. from Satire on the Trades (or Instructions of Dua-Khety), c.1800 bc

The scribe is wealthy and content and always in the ancient world male (but some women, especially in Rome, could read and write). Change within developed systems of writing, where it is found, is a kind of tinkering, and then, ordinarily, toward greater complexity and obscurity, more of the scribal art. Egyptian hieroglyphics managed with about 700 signs for most of its history, but, in a quirky development of the self-conscious Ptolemaic period (323 ­30 bc), increased its repertory to 5,000 signs. Attempts to "improve" a system of writing threaten the conventional basis by which it exists and diminish its intelligibility so that everything worsens. For example, many have complained about the famously inept ­ that is, nonphonetic ­ English or French spellings. The American Philological Association was founded in 1869 to study the world's languages; it boldly encouraged spelling reforms much in the air in the late nineteenth century by publishing its proceedings in a reformed spelling. Today, they can scarcely be read. When Mao Zedong found he could not impose the Roman script, in the interests of the people he simplified the bizarrely intricate Chinese writing by omitting strokes from many characters to improve readability. He thereby rendered Chinese writing unintelligible to Chinese living in Taiwan, San Francisco, and Southeast Asia, whose traditional Chinese characters are now unreadable on the mainland. Major changes in the structure of writing systems took place when the idea of writing passed from one people to another, always foreign people. Not bound by sacred tradition and the interests of a social class and intellectual elite, illiterate foreigners could make important changes. In the changes

16

What Is Writing?

made in this way we can speak of the evolution of writing, of a process proceeding from less able to more able systems of writing.

Writing Is Material
Because writing has a material basis it can be created and destroyed, as bookburners throughout history understand. In the ancient Near East the origin of this life-transforming technology seems to be connected in some way with the use of material objets, abstract "counters" or tokens made of clay that represented commodities, according to a famous argument by Denise Schmandt-Besserat. One carried such material, tangible things in a pouch or on a string around the neck or dropped them accidentally on the ground or exchanged them during a transaction or wrapped them up in a hollow ball of clay, to preserve details of a commercial transaction. After five thousand years of such token use in the Near East, between c.8000 and c.3000 bc, the abstract shapes of some portable material tokens seem to have become characters in the first lexigraphic writing (see Chapter 3). Even such obsolete systems of communication based on writing as semaphore require material flags moving in someone's hands. Morse code seems immaterial. Consisting of an ON/OFF digital mode, it is the only digital-modulation mode that humans can understand without a computer. Nonetheless, messages transmitted by Morse code are directly transferred into written documents. As a property protected by law, writing in cyberspace is in an awkward position, because the relationship of cyberspace to the material world is not clear, and we are unsure how laws of copyright apply to a medium you cannot control. The power of hardcopy, whose doom many predicted, remains strong in comparison to electronic documents because the tangible hardcopy is not endlessly permutable and easy to lose. Contracts, wills, and certificates of marriage, anything having to do with money, remain in hardcopy. Even as pixels on a computer screen, even when floating in cyberspace, writing retains its material basis.

Speech and Writing
In seeking a definition of writing, scholars sometimes take account of writing's materiality but nonetheless emphasize writing as a secondary

What Is Writing?

17

representation of the primary speech. The influential L. Bloomfield, in a book called Language (1933), wrote that "writing is not language, but merely a way of recording language by means of visible marks" (Bloomfield 1933: 21). By "language" he must mean "speech," which writing obviously is not. But is not writing really a language in its own right? The distinguished Mayanist Michael Coe, writing on progress in the decipherment of Maya glyphs, notes that "writing is speech put in visible form in such a way that any reader instructed in its conventions can reconstruct the vocal message. All linguists are agreed on this, and have been for a long time" (Coe 1992: 13, my italics). Coe agrees with Bloomfield, but sees that language and speech are different things. By having "visible form" writing must be material, but "vocal message" nonetheless lies at the heart of the definition. A. Parpola, the distinguished scholar of the Indus Valley writing, calls writing "a visual communication system based on the representation of spoken language by conventional marks of some durability" (Parpola 1994: 29). Is Braille a "visible communication system"? Certainly it is writing. Parpola's "durability" implies materiality, but still writing represents "spoken language." The great Assyriologist and historian of writing I. J. Gelb thought along similar lines, declaring that "writing is written language . . . I agree entirely with the linguists who believe that fully developed writing became a device for expressing linguistic elements by means of visible marks" (Gelb 1963: 13). Because in Gelb's view the phonographic element, "a device for expressing linguistic elements," is the essence of "fully developed writing," or "full writing," the Greek alphabet, beyond which the art of writing has not progressed, came at the apex of a long development. The Greek alphabet is even the telos, the immanent goal, toward which "writing" has always striven, because in the Greek alphabet the phonographic element is overriding. P. L. Daniels, in his and P. T. Bright's useful book The World's Writing Systems, thinks that "writing is defined as a system of more or less permanent marks used to represent an utterance in such a way that it can be recovered more or less exactly without the intervention of the utterer" (Daniels and Bright 1996: 3, original italics). By this definition he agrees that writing is bound up with speech (an utterance) and, in company with other scholars, excludes from "writing" communication by means of symbols or representations not couched in a specific linguistic form. However, in his insistence on recovering an utterance "more or less exactly" Daniels's surprising formulation would exclude all forms of writing up to the Greek alphabet, and even, strictly speaking, the Greek alphabet itself, because

18

What Is Writing?

no writing before or including it permitted the recovery of an original utterance "more or less exactly." When such recovery took place in actual usage it did so on the basis of a shared language between writer and reader and shared expectations based on the context of the message, not on the basis of the phonetic and semantic information encoded in the script. Such understandings of writing as being a secondary representation of the primary speech are always re-expressions of F. Saussure's famous dictum: "A language and its written form constitutes two separate systems of signs. The sole reason for the existence of the latter is to represent the former" (Saussure [1922] 1983: 24). Saussure only echoed Aristotle's formulation: "Spoken words are the symbols of mental experience and written words are the symbols of spoken words" (Aristotle, de Interpretatione 1.1). First comes "language," then comes its "written form," which depends on "language." Yet in its dependence on a material basis, writing is fundamentally unlike speech, which is never tangible. The relationship between written form and speech is more complicated than such commentators believe. Writing is a technology with a material basis, while speech is never a technology and never material but an essentially human aptitude. If dolphins could speak, they would be humans with an odd-shaped nose. In our own definition that writing is a system of markings with a conventional reference that communicates information, we do not refer to speech, language, or utterance. In the definitions of commentators quoted above, the words "speech" and "language" are treated interchangeably and in the clumsy way we complained about earlier. How writing functions will depend on the innate faculty of humans to communicate by means of symbols. A language is any system of symbols that serves this innate faculty to communicate through symbols: speech is one such system of symbols, writing is another (see diagram opposite title page).

Jlow Writing Came About

DENISE~HMANDT-BESSERAT

University of Texas Press Austin

y

/ 1/~
Abridged edition of Before Writing) Volume I: From Counting to Cuneiform Copyright© I992, 1996 by the University of Texas Press All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America First abridged edition, 1996

Requests for permission to reproduce material from this work should be sent to Permissions, -University of Texas Press, Box 7819, Austin, TX 78713-7819.
@The paper used in this publication meets d1e minimUm requirement.<> of American National Standard for Information Sciences- Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39-48-I984.

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING IN PUBLICATION DATA

Schmandt-Besserat, Denise. How writing came about I Denise Schmandt-Besserat.- rst abridged ed. p. em. "Abridged edition of Before Writing, Volume I: From Counting to Ctmeiform." Includes index. ISBN o-292-77704-3 (pbk. : aile paper) 1. Tokens- Middle East. 2. Writing- History. 3. Middle EastAntiquities. I. Schmandt-Besserat, Denise. Before writing. II. Title.
CJ+867.S364 1996

1£! to

Cune~fbrm

To our three grandchildren, who give us such great joy:

NICOLAUS DANIELLE MICHAEL

)fk should be sent to equirements of Ameriof Paper for

X 78713-7819.

~nee

.-Istabridged ed. Counting to

Middle Easting. II. Title.

( :<mtents

Preface

xi
r

Introduction: Tokens, a New Theory

TheMyths 2 The Pictographic Theory 4 Tokens 7
PART ONE: One THE EVIDENCE What Are Tokens?
IS

Types and Subtypes IS Evolution from Plain to Complex IS Materials I7 Manufacture I7 The Token Collection under Study 20
Two Where Tokens Were Handled and Who Used Them 29

Types of Settlements 29 Distribution within Settlements 29 Structures 30 Token Clusters 32 Containers Holding Tokens 32 Associated Assemblages 33 Tokens as Ftmerary Offerings 34
Three Strings of Tokens and Envelopes 39

Strings ofTokens Envelopes 42
Four Impressed Tablets

39

55

Number 55 Context 57

Viii

HOW 'WRITING CAMEABOlJI'

Chronology 57 Description 58 The Signs 58 Beyond the Impressed Tablets: Pictography 68 The Meaning of Signs and Their Corresponding Tokens So The Place ofimprcssed Tablets in the Evolution of Writing 84PART TWO: Five THE INTERPRETATION The Evolution of Symbols in Prehistory

89

Symbols and Signs 89 Lower and Middle Paleolithic Symbols 90 Upper Paleolithic and Mesolithic Symbols 90 Neolithic Symbols 93 A Turning Point in Communication and Data Storage 96
Six Tokens: The Socioeconomic Implications
ror
103

Reckoning Technology and Economy 101 Reckoning Technology and Social Organization
Seven Counting and the Emergence of Writing
rn

The Various Modes of Counting III The Sumerian Philological Evidence II3 The Near Eastern Archaeological Data II4Eight Conclusions: Tokens, Their Role in Prehistory and Their Contribution to Archaeology 123

Economy 123 Political Stmcmre 123 Mathematics 124 Communication 124
PART THREE: THE ARTIFACTS

Cones 128 Spheres 131 Disks 133 Cylinders 137 Tetrahedrons 139 Ovoids 14-1 Quadrangles 14-3 Triangles 14-5 Biconoids 14-7 Paraboloids 14-8 Bent Coils 14-9

ography 68 xresponding

Ovals/Rhomboids 150 Vessels 151 Tools 15+ Animals 155 Miscellaneous 157
Notes 159

CONTENTS

ix

1e Evolution

Glossary 89

183

tory

Index

185

)Ols 90 vmbols 90

1

and Data
ror
103

ations

ny IOI )rganization
III

'iting

m

e 113 ata 114Prehistory
~ology

1

123

Preface

published in 1992 by the University of Texas Press. That work was issued in rwo volmnesI: From Counting to Cuneiform and II: A Catalog ofNear Eastern Tokensand was addressed primarily to specialists. The purpose of the present abridgment is to offer the general reader a less detailed and more affordable book. I have made no changes in tills volmne except for variations in editing, n1inor corrections, and updating a few references. How Writing Came About constitutes the first comprehensive study of Near Eastern tokens to be aimed at a general audience. Based on the analysis and interpretation of a selection of eight thousand specimens frmn 116 sites in Iran, Iraq, the Levant, and Turkey, it documents the llrunediate precursor of the cuneiform script, the world's first writing system. The material, dating from 8ooo to 3000 B.C. and mostly tmpublished before, was collected and studied firsthand in thirty musemns in fifteen countries. Also included here is my systematic study of the 200 envelopes, used to keep tokens in archives, and the 240 impressed tablets now known. These rwo types of objects illustrate the major steps in the transition from tokens to writing. The tokens from early excavations often lack a precise stratigraphy. Even so, the large assemblage presented here gives a reliable picture of the types and subtypes of the counters, their geographic and chronological distribution, their evolution over time, and the transition from tokens to writing. This book is organized into three parts, as follows.
PART ONE: THE EVIDENCE

THIS BOOK IS AN ABRIDGED version of Before Writing,

The first rwo chapters are devoted to the docun1entation of the archaeological material. Chapter r describes the counters, tl1eir shapes, markings,
and manufacture, and their evolution from "plain" to "complex" tokens.

Chapter 2 identifies the context in which the tokens were used: ilie type of settlements to which they belonged; tl1eir spacial distribution within those

Xii

HOW WRITING Cfu\.1E ABOUT

settlen1ents; the structures and assemblages with which they were associated. Special attention is given to the rare tokens found in tombs. Chapter 3 describes the fourth-millennium methods for holding tokens in archives -in particular, the envelopes. The following topics are covered: discovery of the envelopes, their number, geographic distribution, chronology, and conteA1:, the assemblages of tokens they held, the markings they bore, and their role in the transmutation of tokens into writing. Chapter 4- deals with impressed tablets. After a review of the history of their discovery, their number, geographic distribution, chronology, and context, the documents and the signs they bear are described and their contribution to writing is assessed.
PART TWO: THE INTERPRETATION

The last three chapters analyze the role of tokens in the evolution of comn1unication, social structures, and cognitive skills. These interpretations are tentative. There is no doubt that some of the conclusions will have to be revised in the future, when more and better data will be available. In Chapter 5, tokens are interpreted as the second step in the development of record keeping, following Paleolithic tallies. The token was the first code to record economic data, providing the immediate background for the invention of writing. Chapter 6 shows how the econ9my determined the token system and how, in turn, the counters had an impact on society. Chapter 7 discusses the evolution of counting and its role in the invention of writing. Tokens are shown to reflect an archaic mode of "concrete counting," while writing derived from abstract counting. In the Conclusions, I smmnarize the wealth of information provided by tokens on communication, 1nathematics, economy, social stnKtures, and cognitive skills in-prehistoric Near Eastern cultures.
PART THREE: THE ARTIFACTS

The charts in Part Three provide a graphic representation of the sixteen types of tokens and their subtypes. For more information, the reader is invited to consult the complete listing of tokens and the photographic documentation in Before Writing, Volume II: A Catalog of Near Eastern Tokens.

.I\ 1kcns, a New Theory

INTRODUCTION

d 1Hil '1 d!'l't'lojJJIII'IJI and the growth of civilizations have depended, in the main,
i!H j!i if!f/'(11' In tt .fh!' actiFities- the discovery offire) domestication ofanimals) the f#/J!i!/rl/1 o(/a{JOI\' lmt, a{}()JJC all, in the evolution of means to receive, to commu!lllilil'< 11111ilo l'l'flll'ti

his "now/edge, and especially in the development ofphonetic
-COLIN CHERRY 1

il'fil f!{ll·
~I' i'. i·! !I!., 'I'IH: UNIVERSAL WAY

by which humans communicate and

"·"''·'1'1'1 1 '· t'peritncc, fades instantly: before a word is fully pronounced it

II!

olif<Wiy vnnished forever. Writing, the first technology to make tbe spo\Y< il'd permanent, changed tbe hmnan condition.

It

Wi\N 1\

revolution in communication when a script allowed individuals

llliili'IJ

inlbrrnation without meeting face to face. Writing also made it to store information, creating a pool of knowledge well beyond ability of any single hwnan to master yet, at tbe same time, available to Wrlihl!!o)·'-!:eg~1rded as the thres old of histor , because it ended tbe Up(-lll oral tradition, with. all the inacruraoes this entailed. Business i\\.111111\i.stmtion are now inconceivable witbout bookkeeping to balance , ;\nd expenditures. Finally, among the innumerable benefits created 1 _ Wt'iti.rtt:L~?-~.~-~§-!?.-£<!1tr~S-Q~jde~?en they. arise and, in - _and scnltinize, revise, add, subtfaCt, anCCrectTfi'ti1tm to ar, of logic and a depth of thought that would otherwise be

.·did writing come about? It is now generally agreed tbat writing
liWilllt~d in Mesopotamia, present-day Iraq, in~ l~!l<u!_th~mg~ 11,11,' and spread from tbere to Egypt, Elam, and t!l"e It1dus Valley. 3 It
J f!,CIICJ"ally agreed that otber scripts developed later, independently, in 0~1 ~llld Mcsoamerica. 4 The origk of ChineSe and Mesoamerican writIN still enigmatic. In tbis book, I will presenttbj; archaeological evidence ..

11 te Mc~c)p_?~~~~~tS~~---fJ;~gL~ . M~-~fing device:__

-~

--------~-~----

itlllttediatC precursor of the cuneiform script was a syste1n of tokens-

'I d:1y counters of many shapes which served for counting and accow1tli l\' goods in the prehistoric cultures of the Near East. The idea tbat Mt.·>;(lpul'ltmian writing e1nerged from a counting device is new. Until the t·igillc'c'lllh eentury, the origin of writing 'Yas the S\lbject of mxtJ>~ crediting w H h, l\1\ n1lous creai:ure~~·-o~_ ll(i_O"e; f~;-its-T;~~~tio~.-·Th~~-~,.-~·-tne·xge--6£-·-~ i'lilq·,lllcllmcnt, the die-o~yth~t s~st;,:t~d~li:b. ~nrre writing was put

liw,

2

HOW WRITING CAME ABOUT

forward. This vinv endured until the present. 5 In the following pages, I will
show how the conception of the origin of writing evolved through time.

THE MYTHS

The oldest account of the invention of writing is perhaps that of the Sumerian epic Enmerkar and the Lord ofAratta.' The poem relates how En-

merkar, the lord of Umk-Kulaba, sent an emissary to the lord of Aratta
soliciting timber, gold, silver, lapis lazuli, and precious stones to rebuild the

residence of the goddess Inanna. Back and forth the messenger delivered word for word the pleas, threats, and challenges between the two lords, until the day Emnerkar's instructions were too difficult for the emissary to memorize. The lord ofKulaba promptly invented writing, tracing his message on a clay tablet: -The emissary, his mouth (being) heavy, was not able to repeat (it). -Because the emissary, his mouth (being) heavy, was not able to repeat (it), -The lord of Kulaba patted clay and wrote the message like (on a present-day) tablet- Formerly, the writing of messages on clay was not established-Now, with Utu's bringing forth the day, verily this was so, -The lord ofKulaba inscribed tl1c message like (on a present-day) tablet, this, verily, was so. 7 One might add here that, according to the Sumerian king list, Enmerkar lived about 2700 B.C., when writing had been a common practice for five hundred years. Of course this casts doubts on tl1e acmal contribution of Enmerkar to the inven~i ofWriting! In a second Smneri o n Inanna and Enki, the Transfer of the Arts of --zs;iliZ~~~-E;.idu to rech, writing is conceived as one of a hundred basic elements of civilization held by Enki, the lord of wisdom. 8 Inanna coveted the divine decrees for her city, Urulc, and set her mind to getting them. This was done when Enki, drunk, donated to her each and every one of the crafts. In Samuel Noah Kramer's words: Mter their hearts had become happy with drinks, Enki exclain1s: ... ~' ... 0 name of my power, 0 name of my power, To the bright Inanna, my daughter, I shall present ... The arts of woodworking, mctalworlting, writing, toolmalcing, leatherworlcing, ... building, basketweaving."
Pure lnanna took them. 9

Inanna loaded writing and tl1e other divine decrees onto tl1e Boat of Heaven and started an eventful journey back to Uruk. After overcoming
tempests and sea monsters, sent by Enki to recapture his possessions, she

the f()llm\ 111~ f)-lgl'."· l \\·iii ~ c1·oh·cl1 through rlllK.
·i

,. I,., I II~< ,

1t 1·,

11·hcre

she unloaded her precious booty to the de-

INTRODUCTION

3

r,,,

1

.,,,

.J, 1

~ ~';(:rluf'S riut oi" the .'-;\l he poem rL-LHc'i h(_l\\ En ;u:· to the lord or :-\r~ltt.l ·ious stones to rebuild the the messenger dcliH-rcd ~ between the two lords, fficulr for the emissarv to l 1\Titing, tracing his nlCs-

Oannes, a sea creature with the hc.td, !l-et, and voice of a man, gave to the Babyloni; li· ! , ,, ·\\ I·, 1.:·.· , d II Tit tttg, language, science, and crafts of all types. 10 In .d;' · 1; ;I ·\ I·" 11.111 1,.\ 1·., 1hr god Ea, the lord ofvirisdom, \VJ.S the source of di , , , , 1 11; IJ'.I· .II I·. 111 1\\' lrdgr, \\'riting in particular. 11 In Assyria, Nabu, son , d '\ 1 ;: , r, 11 11 ,1'. 11 \ ,.1,., l .t·; 1he itlstTuctor of mankind in all arts and crafts, 12 H<, 11 i' I!! 1il I q 1111 !111) ', .. q·,1 ll 1 d ll!l'c, ~md writing. l!i 11" l\il+l· t ;~~~ltnc,tlnl his will to mankind with the Tables of the l \\\ '·' 1 1111 11 l i\ 11 w lltt)-',l'l' 1d' ( ;od." l.l The source of great debates,I 4 these -<ldlth \ \ j I· l!lli'l!lll'lvd l'\' Danit·llkf()c as meaningthat"thetwoTablcs, Will H-i i Iii !11!' 1 111p,n 1 11' ( ;od i11 Mount 5Nnai, was the first Writing in the
, l··-l1 111, I 11 H'

.,.r,,,,,

I·· l'.,·l,l'>'>tl.'>, Nal~vloniaca,

Iii,'"'.!
not able to repeat (it) .

ilidl

,dl <>iiH'ii\lpliotl>cls cbivc H·om the Hebrew"(fig.

1). 15

Oth-

.vy, was not able to re-

: message like (on a

,ls nor establishedly this 1vas so, e (on a present-day)

~rian king list, Enmerkar :ommon practice for five 1e actual contribution of

the 1ramfer of the Arts of ved as one of a hundred ord of wisdom. 8 Inanna I set her mind to getting ·o her each ;md every one

Enki exclaims: ower, :.:nt ... ng, toolmaking,

~s,

Fig. 1. Title page of Daniel Defoe's An
Essay upon Literature

ecrecs onto the Boat of Urulc After overcoming ture his possessions, she

(London: Thomas Bowles, i 726). Courtesy Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, University of Texas at Austin.

4

HOW WRITING CAME ABOUT

ers credited Adan1 as the inventor of writing. In r668, John Wilkins, one of

the founders of the Royal Society and an influential and respected English scholar, 10 commented that Adam had invented the Hebrew alphabet: "though not im1nediatcly after his creation, yet in process of time, upon his experience of their great necessity and usefulness." 17 The myths, from Sumer to Daniel Defoe, share one common characteristic: they present writing as emerging, on one day, as a full-fledged script. None of them conveys the notion of an evolution from a simple to a n1ore complex system of communication. The concept of a ready-made alphabet handed down fron1 heaven persisted until the eighteenth century.
THE PICTOGRAPHIC THEORY

~1'1i

lj;J.,,s,1

--

.. ~::~pts~?~~i~~~~Y ~e~~~?.P~~f~o_;n ~~~I~~-~ye ~E.~~}9gLill'Uin~d:rl~se / picU.lies became riiOi-e alld ffiore simplified and developed into abstract characters. The theory was presented in Warburton's book, Divine Legation ofMoses, published in London in 1738. 18 The ideas made their way into Dii derot and d'Ale1nbcres Encyclupidie, in the article entitled "Ecriture," which I gave them a wide diffusion." Warburton's pictographic theory remained \ practically lmchallenged for over two hundred years. For example, in the revised edition of A Study of Writing (1974), at present one of the bestknown modern scholarly publications on writing, L J. Gelb still stated: "it became clear that the Mesopotamian cuneiform writing has developed ...., from a pictographic stage." 20 --? Although the existence of ~~m had been noticed by Western trav-~ elers as early as the fifteenth century, ancient Near Eastern scripts did not play a role in the elaboration of the pictographic theory because they were still little known in 1738. In the nineteenth century, when archaeological expeditions reaped tl1e first great harvests of cuneiform texts and brought them back to Europe, the cuneiform script was regarded as conforming to Warburton's paradigm. In 1913, George A. Barton was of the opinion that "the investigator must proceed upon the hypotl1esis that Babylonian writing, like other primitive writing, originated in pictographs." The pictographic theory scheme was modified, however, to include a three-step progression frmn ideographic to phonetic writing. "Indeed/' wrote Barton, "wherever the beginnings of writing could be traced, it took the form of picture writing, so tl1at it seems safe to regard it as a working hypothesis, if not as a law, that all early systems of writing began in a series of pictographic ideographs, tlut syllabic values were developed from these and in some cases alphabetic values." 21 In fact, the idea tlut tl1e cuneiform script started with picture writing was by no means a perfect fit. In 1928, a year before the discovery of the Uruk tablets, William A. Mason noted,~~W~Jll.lJ§.~.a.~is__~~th~ _J

1

In the eighteenth cenn1ry, William Warburton, bishop of Gloucester, introduced the first evolutionary theory of writing. Based on his observations of Egyptian, Chinese, and Aztec manuscripts, Warburton argued that all

)68, John VVilkins, one of

i<1l and respected English I the Hebrc\\' .1\p\ubet: process of time, upon his

'one common characrcr-

y, as a full-fledged script.
fl·om a simple to a more )fa rt\ldy-made alphabet teenth century.

most ::trchaic inscriptions discovered, it is ~~?t always easy to ''i',11i·n.· the original objects.'' The pictographic theo~)r, however, was !H \, 1 1 lllt'sl'i<mcd. Instead, the Babylonian scribes wer_e_ l:Jlamed fqr t~~e d~s~- ! !f Jl,tllr\' hclwccn _ p!:_e_conceived ideas and facts: __ ~'Owing to the lin1itations 1,1 1lj 1rt1it ivc culture, rile ·rnexp-eflenceOf the-sC~ibes and the lack of artistic .11,1111 v, each scribe drew the characters in his own crude, faulty way, often i111 , ll'ln·tly; so that it is quite impossible always definitely to distinguish the ; 11,1! o~l'llT ~111d identify it with the object intended." 22 I 'Ill· season of 1929-1930 at Un1k brought considerable new information ,dH Ill( the beginning of writing. Hundreds of archaic tablets wetyllil~ --~-.
\1111'',1 .111d
i 1,

INTRODUCTION

5

!'dtlltl'd thnt pushed writing back to the fourth millennium B.C.fSigns ) 11 ,\l vd or impressed with a stylus in a technique different ±fom the Cu~ 1<" "' ;:cript had been termed pictographic. These archaic tablets, however,
1 111

hop of Gloucester, introed on his observations of rburton argued that all ::;s. In time, he said, these developed into abstract .1's book, Divine Legation made their vvay into Dintitlcd "Ecriture," which ~raphic theory remained ars. For example, in the present one of the bestI. J. Gelb still stated: "it writing has developed

Jtradictcd the pictographic theory. Ada1n Falkenstein, the German ,,\ l11 1L1r who studied the texts, noted that when writing began in Mesopo! illlli<l 1 truly pictorial signs were rare exceptions. Those that were tndy pic!ori.d1 like the signs for "plow,'' "chariot," "sledge," or "wild boar," were 11111 i)llly i-Cw but ofnncommon use, represented by a single occurrence on 23 I !lit' ctblct alone. The common signs were abstract: the sign for "metal" \\';l~i >I rrcsccnt with five lines; the "pictograph" for ''sheep" was a circle with
1

t '"'·"·The Uruk tablets seriously strained the pictograph theory by showing that· when writing began in Mesopotamia pictographic signs were rarely
itll'tL

(l,dward Chiera and others tried to reconcile Falkenstein's observations

\Vith the pictographic theory. They argued that the Uruk texts represented
ill! ,drcady evolved script and that a previous stage, consisting of true pic-

tllf',l';tphs, probably had been written on a perishable material, such as
wood, bark, papyrus, or parchment which had disintegrated in time and t:(il!ltltlcvcr be recovered. 24 Tht~ next excavation campaign at Urulc, in I930-193I, produced im-

noticed by Western travr Eastern scripts did not heory because they vverc ~ry, when archaeological iform texts and brought ~arded as conforming to \vas of the opinion that ;is that Babylonian writ'ictographs." The pictoinclude a three-step pro'Indeed," wrote Barton, ced, it took the fonn of a working hypothesis, if ;;an in a series of pictoloped frmn these and in

tablets which continued to challenge the pictographic theory. These
l't'\l.'i, like others found previously at Susa and later at Khafaje, Godin Tepe,

IVhtri, Tell Brak, Habuba Kabira, and Jebel Aruda, were more ancient than fhr "pictographic" Uruk tablets studied by Falkenstein. They were, how\'Vrr, not made of wood, bark, papyrus, or parchment, as Chiera had hy. ,.,.,, t. ·.·.,,;iz···L

This earliest form of writing consisted of wedges, circles, ovals,

tl'iangles impressed on clay tablets and was anything but pictographic. gulf between the evidence and the neat charts of pictographs illustrated
_lH!<Jks became even wider.

l!y the second half of the twentieth century, enough data had accwnupresent a serious challenge to the pictographic theory. From Chamllllon in 1822 to Ventris in 1953, each great decipherment eroded the prem' upon which the pictographic theory was built and determined that the f'ill'i)' scripts all had phonetic features. Anthropologists like Andre Leroi( it Hid t:\11 entered the debate, warning against preconceptions about prirniliW picture writings. In his volume Le Geste et Ia parole, he argued that "the
10

:ed with picture writing Ore the discovery of the : admit, that even in the

6

HOW YVRITING CAME ABOUT

linguists who have studied the origin of writing have often conferred to pictographic systen1s a value which derives from literacy." Leroi-Gourhan noted that the only true pictographic scripts were recent phenomena; that most had emerged in groups which did not have vvriting prior to contacts with travelers or colonists from literate countries. He concluded: "therefore it seems in1possible to use Eskimo or Indian pictography in order to understand the ideography of preliteratc societies." 25 Scholars began to question the idea that writing emerged as the rational decision of a group of enlightened individuals, such as that put forward by V. Gordon Childe in What Happened in History: "the priests ... have agreed upon a conventional method of recording receipts and cxpendinrres in written signs that shall be intelligible to all their colleagues and successors; they have invented writing." 26 For, like other human inventions, writing I did not come ex nihila and, in Chiera's words, "there never was a first man who could sit down and say, 'Now I am going to write.' That supreme achievement of mankind, the one which makes possible the very existence of civilization by transferring to later generations the acquisitions of the earlier ones, was the result of a slow and natural devclop1nent." 27 Above all, the pictographic theory-wasnotconsist~~'t witlimodern archaeological research. In recent years, Near Eastern excavations have focused on the beginning of agrimln1re and cities and have tried to determine how these events affected society. Viewed in the perspective of the urban phenomenon, the first "pictographic" tablets ofUmk (and for that matter the earlier impressed tablets) are out of step with other socioeconomic developments. These first documents occur in level IVa ofUrnk, lagging far behind the rise of cities and d1e emergence of the temple instirntion, which was already welltmder way some two hundred years earlier (in levels XIV). If writing emerged so late, it could not have played a role in state formation. How, then, did the Mesopotamian city-states function without record keeping? Although popular books have continued to present the traditional pictographic d1eory, 28 as early as the 1950s scholars had begun to anticipate d1e discovery of an antecedent of the Mesopotamian script. Some, like V. Gordon Childe, searched for it in ~e s-Wh!le-others looked into potter's marks, but to no avail. 29 Most, like ton ~d, foresaw an even earlier script: "The degree of competence .. ,-[attained by script of the Uruk: IV tablets] ... suggests that earlier stages in its development may eventually be recognized elsewhere, perhaps in levels corresponding to Uruk: V and VI." 30 David Diringer simply referred to "another more primitive writing" or "an at present unknown, early script, which may have been the common ancestor of [the Indus Valley Script and] also of the cuneiform and early ( Elamite writings." 31 ~se that the antecedent of writing W_!_~--~E!~_) /(1 ~~~~c!gi-'.S What had een missed-or clis1 missed- were the humble tokens that had been used for centuries and that ·'' were, I argue, the immediate precursor to writing. I The pictographic theory will remain a landmark in the history of ideas

l~Vrll

(

!Hill,

li;H t
\\TI
/j(jj

i

lkt

; have often conferred to literacy." Leroi-Gourhan e recent phenomctu; that \:YTiting prior to contacts He concluded: ''therefore 1graphy in order to under~

Iii··"''"-"'' it was the first evolutionary explanation of writing, departing from
lill'lll<'l' bdiefthat a full-fledged script had been communicated to lmhv divine revelation. The theory was based, however, on Egyptian, _!lilt'.'·~\ ;llld New World 1nodels that were irrelevant. Over the course of 1 wcmicth century, archaeology has generated new evidence that contradh ted 1"11e paradigm. At the same time, excavations steadily produced small jtikt'!lN t·hat, as I will show, were the antecedent of writing.

INTRODUCTION

7

1g emerged as the rational Lch as that put fonvard by the priests ... have agreed ipts and expenditures in :olleagues and successors; rman inventions, writing tere never was a iirst man to write.' That supreme ossible the very existence ts the acquisitions of the evelopment." 27 nsistent with modern ar:ern excavations have fod have tried to determine perspective of the urban )ruk (and for that matter other socioeconomic deIVa of Uruk, lagging far :emplc institution, which 'Cars earlier (in levels Xve played a role in state y-states function without

TOKillNS

;f!iv immediate precursor of cuneiform writing was a system of tokens.
'l'h<'~<t small <=;aebjec:'__~Q.l'Jl'"lf"s~-:;; cones, spheres, disks, cylinders, tiH\ served· as counters in the prehistoric Near East and can be traced to
!Iii'

_.· ·. .

Neolithic period, starting about 8ooo B.C. They evolved to meet the ~-----··---· -··-- -··----------------~---of the economy, at first keeping track of the products of farming, itll expanding in the urban age to keep track of goods manufacmred in ll'kshops. The development of tokens was tied to the rise of social strucrt:s, emerging with rank leadership and coming to a climax with state

Also, corresponding to the increase in bureaucracy, methods of storing I , in archives were devised. One of these storage methods employed envelopes, simple hollow clay balls in which the tokens were placed sealed. A drawback of the envelopes was that they hid the enclosed , . Accountants evenmally resolved the problem by imprinting the · of the tokens on the surface of the envelopes prior to enclosing . The number of units of goods was still expressed by a corresponding 'rn11nlhcr of markings. An envelope containing seven ovoids, for example, ll'~~ seven oval markingS:~·--"\_ \ Pourth-millennium ac2b:tl!)J:ahts s06rr'?e'ilized that the tokens within ilie
'""''·lno1t.< were made unnecessary by the presence of markings on the outer

'The

~-~~fyi~~-~{Q(~o~~ iv~~-~--~~-~~~:-~~ing.

\(

_! __ _

I
i
I

esent the traditional pied begtm to anticipate the cript. Some, like V GorJked into potter's marks, w an even earlier script: script of the U mk IV ·lopment may eventually ponding to Uruk V and more primitive writing" y have been the common the cuneiform and early tt of writing was not ag l been missed- or dis- -· ed ±Or cennrries and that

As a result, tablets- solid clay balls bearing markings- replaced

or

k in the history of ideas

hollow envelopes filled with tokens. These markings became a system 'their own which developed to include not only impressed markings but ll'\lll'e legible signs traced with a pointed stylus. Both of these types of symh( Ji.s, which derived from tokens, were picture signs or "pictographs." They were not, however, pictographs of the kind anticipated by Warburton. The tilg.ns were not pictures of the items they represented but, rather, pictures the tokens used as counters in the previous accounting system. What fascinated me most in this smdy was the realization that the tokenl M)'Ntcm. reflected an archaic mode of"concrete'' counting prior to the inventltlll of abstract nwnbers. There were no tokens for "r" or "ro." Instead, a particular counter was needed to account for each type of goods: jars of oil i were counted with ovoids, small measures of grain with cones, large mea- ) NUI'es of grain with spheres. Tokens were used in one-to-one correspondl'ncc: one jar of oil was shown by one ovoid, two jars of oil by two ovoids,

0

l!O\V \VIUTINU Ci\Mn i\IIOU'l'

ill

t'l\', 'I'IH.' l~(H\Nt.:qul'tll'CN (lr tl1is disc<wcry arc signifkant. Namely, writing re~adred 1101· only Ji·om new bureaucratic demands but from the invention of abstTact I.Xlllnting. '!'he most important evidence tmcovered is that counting

wa.s not, as f·(mncrly assumed, subservient to writing; on the·contrary, writing emerged fron1 counting.
Studies on Tokens

Tokens ca1nc n1y way by chance. It all started in I969-I97I, when I was awarded a fellowship from the Radcliffe Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts (now the Bunting Instimte) to smdy the use of clay before pottery in the Near East. Tllls led me to systematically examine Near Eastern archaeological clay collections, dating from 8ooo to 6ooo B.C., stored in museums of the Near East, North Africa, Europe, and North America. I was looking for bits of Neolithic clay floors, hearth lining, and granaries, for bricks, beads, and figurines, and I found plenty of these. I also came across a category of artifacts that I did not expect: miniature cones, spheres, disks, tetrahedrons, cylinders, and other geometric shapes made of clay. I noted their shape, color, manufacture, and all possible characteristics. I counted them, measured them, drew sketches of them, and entered them into my files under the heading ''gemnetric objects." Later, when it became obvious that not all the artifacts were in geometric form, but smne were in the shape of animals, vessels, tools, and other commodities, the word was changed to token. I became increasingly puzzled by the tokens because, wherever I would go, whether in Iraq, Iran, Syria, Turkey, or Israel, they were always present among the early clay assemblages. If they were so widely used, they must ( have had a useful function. I noted that thee-~~~~~¢___, ).-.F_it:f:5.Nt: a;1dthat ~hey 'Yen:.tl~S.fi~t _slay_obi<:Sts.t<:J~av~oee11 harde11_sd bL l fire. The factthat people went to snchttouble for their preparation further \_;,~sted that thefwereoflinporrailc(;_:'flletolens appeared to be part of i a system, for I repeatedly found small and large cones, thin and thick disks, \ small and large spheres- even fractions of spheres, snch as half and three\ quarter spheres. But what were the tokens used for? r I asked archaeologists about the tokens and learned that everyone who had excavated early sites had encountered the1n in their trenches. No one, i -------____.,...-~~\\''C"""'-·m!'\V_'Yh;!J:_t;!'ey_w-!'':~c~ looked in site reports and noted that tokens were usually omitted or relegated to such headings as "en~_sm_~.~!-~-~ jects" or "objects of uncertain purpose._" The authors who did -risk an interpretatiori identified the tO~kCns as amulets or game pieces. Carletori Coon is among those who simply wondered. He jovially reported about the five cones he found at Belt Cave, Iran, as follows: "From levels n and rz cmne five mysterious conical clay objects, looking like nothing in the world but suppositories. VVhat they were used for is anyone's guess." 32 The data I collected on tokens seemed at first to be of little significance, but ultimately made it possible to recognize the importance of these arti1 1

icant. Namely, vvriting rebut from the invention or In covered is that counting ing; on the contrary, ·writ-

that\

on the Neolithic counters turned out to be the piece finally, gave a clue to the entire picture.

INTRODUCTION

9

~!'"""""!'

n r969-197I, \vhen I was e, Cambridge, Massachu' of clay before pottery in inc Near Eastern archaeo) B.C., stored in museums th America. I was looking and granaries, fOr bricks, I also cmne across a catecones, spheres, disks, tetmade of clay. I noted their :teristics. I com1ted them, ~ed them into my files unn it became obvious that :on1e were in the shape of :he word was changed to

t!lFt!l:ntcolt>gist·s., starting with Jacques de Morgan at Susa (1905) and Uruk ( 1929 ), should be recognized for excavating, prcserv[1Hblishing tokens, even though they seemed insignificant at the · L. Broman is to be credited for including in her work the study ·of tokens from Janno. 33 VVhen Broman completed her thesis 11hc too had no alternative but to guess from the shape of the objects I might have been. Consequently, she attributed a different functo Ci\Ch particular type. She viewed the cones as being perhaps schellgudncs and the spheres as sling stones or marbles. She also earcones, spheres, and hemispheres as possible counters, noting that shepherds today keep track of tl1eir flocks with pebbles. 34 At the !tel' insight could not be supported by archaeological evidence. Only later, however, the use of colmters in the ancient Near East was

ecause, wherever I would they were always present o widely used, they must 'VVere often Inant~factured _, to hai~ 5e~n harder1ed by_. · their preparation fi.1rther :ns appeared to be part of )nes, thin and thick disks, :s, such as half and three)r? arned that everyone who n their trenches. No _one, eports and noted that to:adings as "enigmatic ob_-_ ors who did risk an inter: pieces. Carleton Coon is r reported about the five ·om levels n and r2 cmne rrothing in the world but s guess.'' 32 o be of little significance, importance of these arti-

A. Leo Oppenheinl of tl1e University of Chicago wrote an article <:ountcrs of the second millennium B.C. which proved to be the key to [\d<:l'st:an-dirtgwhat the tokens were. 35 His paper concerned a peculiar hoitablet recovered in the late 1920s at the site of Nuzi, in northern Iraq 2)." This egg-shaped tablet belonged, together with a normal tablet an accolmt of the same transaction, in the family archive of a sheep named Puhisenni. 37 The cuneiform inscription on the hollow tablet as follows: Counters representing small cattle:
21 ewes tl1at lamb 6 female lambs Hfull grown male sheep +male lambs 6 she-goats that kid 1 he-goat 1 female kids

The seal of Ziqarru, the shepherd. 38 When opening the hollow tablet, the excavators found it to hold forty-nine counters which, as stipulated in the text, corresponded to the number of animals listed. 39 That hollow tablet proved to be the Rosetta stone of the token system.

10

HOW WRITING CA1lEABOUT

Fig. 2. "Hollow tablet,"
Nuzi, Iraq. Courtesy

Ernest Lachernan.

The counters (Akkadian abnu, pl. abnati, translated "stone" by Oppenheim), the list of animals, and the explanatory cuneiform text leave no possible doubt that at Nuzi cmmters were used for accounting. Although no other example of a umeiform tablet holding cmmters has ever been encountered in Nuzi or, for that matter, in Mesopotamia or the Near East, Oppenheim made a case that abnati were commonly used in the bureaucracy. He suggested that each animal of a flock was represented by a stone held in a container. The tokens were transferred to various receptacles to keep track of changes of shepherds or pasture, when animals were shorn, and so on. He based his argrnnent on short cuneiform notes found in archives, referring to abnati "deposited," "transferred," and "removed" as follows: -These sheep are with PN; the (pertinent) stones have not been yet deposited. -Three lambs, two yow1g he-goats, the share ofPN, they are charged to his account (but) not deposited among the stones. -One ewe belonging to PN, its stone has not been removed. -Altogether 23 sheep of Silwatesup, PN brought ... their stones have not been transferred. - x ewes that have lambed, without (pertaining) stones, belonging to PN. 40 Marcel Sigrist has pointed out further texts which probably also allude to counters in the Third Dynasty ofUr, ca. zooo B.C. For instance, a tablet dealing with oxen reads: "The remaining part of the account is held in the leather pouch" (Sumerian: Kus du 10 -gan)Y

\\'h;tn Oppenheim wrote his article, no one la1ew what the counters llltr, ( H\:oursc, the abnati mentioned in the texts were not described ilii!'H' ltcld in the Nuzi hollow tablet were lost. They were simply re111 ;L'i ~~pebbles" in the site report, with no infornution as to their lH' i IH' rnatt~rial of which they were made. 42 The next important piece PI !/'!.It-' was provided by Pierre Amiet in Paris.
·

INTRODUCTION

11

·

!P AHih:t swdicd seals used in the administration of ancient Near EastHili Ut't'N to validate docmnents. In particular, he came to study the im-

:lated "stone" by Oppcn· neifOrm text leave no pos~ accounting. Although n<) ters has ever been encounorthc Near East, Oppcnx{ in the bureaucracy. He ntcd by a stone held in a receptacles to keep track s were shorn, and so on. fOund in archives, referloved" as fOllows:

nes have not been yet

>fPN, they arc charged
~stones.

)Cen removed. ht ... their stones have ) stones, belonging

ch probably also allude c. For instance, a tablet e account is held in the

of' such seals on globular clay objects from Susa. These artifacts II! lilt IIV and contained small clay objects. Following Oppenheim's lead, !!iterprctcd the small clay objects endosed in the day envelopes as I'Cprcscnting commodities. 43 The proposition was daring, since ~il!iil envelopes came two thousand years earlier than the Nuzi egglitblct, with no known example in the interval. It was a leap of great ,m lt'LH '"" l'br three reasons. First, the corn1ters were revealed: they were :nLiil\111''" dny artifacts modeled in various, mostly geometric, shapes. Sectile I:! usa envelopes showed that counters held in envelopes were not 1 . .I to the literate period but extended into the time before writing iith'lltcd. Third, Amiet foresaw tlte possibility that tlte calculi were an of writing. In his words: "One might ask whetlter [tl1e scribe] ill mind the little objects tltat were enclosed in the envelopes, and tlut t'tHIVCiltionally would symbolize certain goods." 44 contribution was a tremendous step, but it revealed only one lhunc of the token system at a particular location: namely, Susa about II,C. It should be kept in mind tltat in 1966, prehistoric tokens were ktt!l\VIl and the only published parallels to the Susa envelopes were rcc:mtly excavated in Urulc 45 Six years later, in 1972, whenAmiet pubtile Susa envelopes in his Glyptique susienne, he still described the · ngs on envelopes as follows: "a series of round or long notches, similu lite ciphers featured on tablets and corresponding to the munber of 1li L'tldosed inside. The shape of the notches, however, is not as varied {!1.11 11f the calculi." 46 More recently, Alniet summarized his position: "I . lit Its wondering whetlter writing was inspired by certain of these calculi I I in the envelopes."" M.tlll'kc Lambert, conservator of Western Asiatic antiquities at the ITL', took Amiet's insight two steps farther. He clearly recognized that . lit·,t impressed signs of writing were reproducing tlte shape of the for1' v;1lcu\i: "Writing, here as elsewhere, imitated true things." 48 Conse'"''''"'""· he assigned the values r, ro, 6o, 6oo, and 3,6oo to, respectively, the , ltnlmn, sphere, large tetrahedron, punched tetrahedron, and large r ., a route that turned out to have been, partly, a false one. \ II tr recognition tltat the tokens constituted an accotmting system which (!'il1.il'd !(>I' five thousand years in prehistory and which was widely used in !IH ,., 11 ire Ncar East was to be my own contribution. I was also able to draw
lll!i

12

HOW WRITING CAME ABOUT

II

parallels between the shapes of the tokens and those of the first incised signs of writing and to establish the continuity between the two recording systems. Finally, much later, I realized the mathematical importance of the tokens as an archaic reckoning device, preceding the invention of abstract counting. I recall vividly when, in 1970, two pieces of the puzzle snapped together for n1e. In order to prepare a class lecture, I pulled from my files Amict's 1966 article, which I had not seen since I began collecting tokens. I could not believe 1ny eyes when I saw the small clay cones, spheres, and tetral1edrons illustrating the paper. Until then, I had instinctively dis1nissed the idea that the Susa artifacts could have anything to do with the tokens which had been found in Neolithic villages. Mter all, the calculi from Susa were held in envelopes and the Neolithic tokens were loose; moreover, the objects were separated by thousands of years. The next day, however, I was intrigued enough to check sc_veral excavation reports of fourth-, fifth-, and sixth-millennimn sites and saw the possibility that tokens might have been used, with no discontinuity, between 8ooo and 3000 B.C. Therestwashard work. My tirst publications on tokens and their relation to writing date from 1974 to 1978,49 those on tokens and concrete counting from 1983,t0 1986.50

of the first incised .'>igtl.', the two recording w.·. tical importance or I I \l' 1e invention of abstr.lLI ; of the puzzle snap])L'Ll , I pulled from my lilc.·; gan collecting token'>. I lay cones, spheres, .lilt! l instinctively disrnis.'>nl ; to do \Vith the tokctlS ll, the calculi from Su . . ;t re loose; moreover, l"lw ext day, however, I \\';l.'l :s of fourth-, fifth-, and okens might have been ) B.C. The restlvas hard :1ation to writing <.:btc counting fron1 1983 to

The Evidence

PART ONE

CHAPTERONili

: 1/IMtttfacture of small objects modeled in clay and hardened with fire was a artiat.lar,lv important activity at Tell Aswad, especially in level II, in the first ''"""''~·seventh millennium . ... These were . .. artifacts ofgeometric shapes, aS balls, disks, and small cups. -HENRI DE CONTENSON'
Wl'UN TOKENS WERE INVENTED, they were great novelties. They were

the first clay objects of the Near East and the first to be fired into :Cc>ran1ic. Their shapes also were revolutionary since, as Cyril Smith has tlC>int:ed out, they first exploited, systematically, all the basic geometric fm·tm:.' This first chapter deals with the physical aspect of the tokens, the types and subtypes, the evolution from ''plaid' to "complex" tokens, the materials of which these artifacts were made, and the technique used for their manufacture.
TYPES AND SUBTYPES

Tokens are small clay objects, modeled into the following sixteen main types: (I) cones, (2) spheres, (3) disks, (4) cylinders, (5) tetrahedrons, ( 6) ovoids, (7) quadrangles, (8) triangles, (9) biconoids, (ro) paraboloids, (n) bent coils, (I2) ovals/rhomboids, (IJ) vessels, (I4) tools, (I5) anin1als, and (I6) miscellaneous. (See the charts in Part Three below.) The tokens are further classified into subtypes according to intentional variations in size or the addition of markings. Cones, spheres, clisks, and tetriliedrons, for example, are consistently represented in two sizes, ''small" and "large." Spheres also occur in fractions such as hemispheres and three-quarter spheres. The markings consist of incised lines, notches, punches, pinched appenclices, or applique pellets. Because they were handmade, the size of the tokens varies from artifact to artifact and from site to site. The usual dimension ranges from r to 3 em across. The "large" subtypes of cones, spheres, disks, and tetrahedrons measure about 3~ 5 em.
EVOLUTION FROM PLAIN TO COMPLEX

During the first four thousand years tokens were "plain" (fig. J). The forms consisted mainly of geometric shapes, such as cones, spheres, flat and len-

Fig. 4. Token assemblage illustrating major types of tokens, Uruk, Iraq. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

20

THE

EVIDENCE

crisp edges, but some arc sloppily done, exhibiting an uneven contour. The stone tokens, which required far greater skill to manufacture and a timeconsmning polishing process, usually show excellent craftsnunship. Tokens of the Neolithic period were not thoroughly baked and often reveal a black core. Scanning electron microscopy and differential thermal analysis confirmed that the firing temperature of the prehistoric tokens varied between 500° and 800° C. The fourth-millennium B.C. cotmters, on the other hand, are usually bufi:pink throughout their thiclmess, showing a perfect control ofthe firing process.
THE TOKEN COLLECTION UNDER STUDY

Fig. 5. Complex tokens, Susa, Iran. Courtesy Mus8e du Louvre, 08partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

This study is based on 8,162 tokens consisting of 3,354 spheres, 1,457 cones, 1,095 disks, 8o6 cylinders, 278 quadrangles, 233 triangles, 220 tetrahedrons, 204 ovoids, 129 animals, 85 paraboloids, Sr vessels, 6o bent coils, 51 biconoids, 45 ovals, 33 miscellaneous, and 3I tools. The assemblage, which is fially published in Before Writing, Volume II: A Catalog ofNear Eastern Tokens, has been compiled by studying the collections in the museums where they were stored or from site reports and, ideally, by combining the two sources. The catalog suggests two observations. First, the number of tokens differs greatly from site to site. Compare, for example, tl1e largest assemblages- Jarmo 2,022, Uruk 812, Susa 783, Ganj Dareh Tepe 575, Tepe Gawra 485, Tell Ramad 380, and Tell Aswad 320- with some of tl1e smallest collections- Matarrili I, Tell Songor I, Ubaid I, and Tell Hassuna 3. Second, small token assemblages are more frequent than large ones, with as many as tl1irty collections having fewer than ten tokens. The number of counters per site does not seem to reflect particular

Fig. 6. Tokens with punctated markings, Susa, Iran. Courtesy Musee du Louvre, D8partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

uneven contour. The nufacn1re and a tiinecraftsmanship. ghly baked and often 1d differential thermal prehistoric tokens var1 B.c. counters, on the thickness, showing a
1

3. DISKS
Incised Lines

'·-·--·-·-··--··

Parallel Lines

Parallel Lines +Strokes

1(D2(I[D2@D21JID2®2·2· 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 (]]) QED@ 00800 36 37 37A 38 39 40 41 42 42A
-

.

4- spheres, 1,4-57 cones,

tetrahedrons, o bent coils, 51 biconmblage, which is fully Car Eastern Tokens, has eums where they were ~the two sources. munber of tokens dif· le, the largest ass em· Tepe 575, Tepe Gawra 1e of the smallest col· II Hassuna 3. Second, ;e ones, with as many

~les, 220

~@e ~@~~@®

··--

4~ 4~4. CYLINDERS
Incised Lines

4. 4. 48~ 490 500 16
(~

15

E
6. OVOIDS
Circular Incised Lines

t:j

~:9

17

~
O_i

~~:}

1

to reflect particnlar

Vertical Lines

140 15@ 16i 17i 18. 19® 20® 21e 22@ .. 0 0 © @ 8 9
· . ··

(])C) (j])E8
7. QUADRANGLES
Strokes

5w

6m

78=~

Chart 1. Token series. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

Horizontal Lines

10

~
1 5 8 9

11

8. TRIANGLES
Strokes

~
6 7 10

Incised Lines

2

vvv
11 12 15 16 19 20

C7G0V
13

VV\cJCO
14 18

Parallel Lines

23

V~\QY\znY Q:zrssY \fJ]JSY 'QJmjY ~ ~
21 22 24 25 26

17

~~~~
Incised Base

41

V~,

9. BICONOIDS
Incised Lines

6~

77

8$

9~

Chart 1. (continued)

PARABOLOIDS
1 4 5 6 6A 68

OOOQ~O
Circular Line 12 13 14 15

- - -

Oiffitlil
11. BENT COILS
Straight Section+
Punctations

12. RHOMBOIDS
22

rw

13. VESSELS
Pitchers

Jars

Chart 1. (continued)

Tllll

h\llhm,lnH

firl\!!iit)~!ll10lllk Hlt'!fli"#

bllt, tlll'hll!\ tl\1\ ll!dll1k1il di llicultics in excavating the

Hlilli.'!'h\1 \llld in ~m!lpi!llif,l till' ow\ log. Tllcl'c is no indication, for example,

thi\1' life· (\!' )itl'l'HO, which produced liOllW two thousand tokens, was much difii!l'clli' lhm1 rhat of orhcr Nwlirhic sites such as Hasswu, which yielded only three. 'l'hc large discrepancy between the number of tokens at each site has to do with the type of expedition. Excavations depend greatly upon
luck: one trench may produce nmncrous artifacts~ whereas the next is stcr~

ile. Consequently, short-term salvage projects limited to small excavated
surfaces are more vulnerable to chance than is full-scale horizontal exposure

in extensive fieldwork, as at Jarmo. This probably explains why Tell Abada, for example, produced an assemblage of fifty tokens, 4 whereas the neighboring Tell Oueili yielded fewer tl1an five tokens. Methods of excavation are also responsible for the uneven nwnbers. Tokens pose a challenge to the best excavators because of their size and color. Being small and blending in with the fill, they are particularly difficult to spot. Expeditions such as Jarmo and Ganj Dareh, where the dirt was systematically sifted, had a better chance of salvaging tokens from the excavation dwnps than those where tl1is did not occur. At all sites, the plain cylinders- which are not much bigger tl1an a grain of wheat- are probably among those which were most missed. It is very possible that spheres were indeed the most popular token shape; on tl1e other hand, they were often taken for marbles and tl1erefore had the best chance to be entered in site reports under the rubric "games." In fact, the lack of docwnentation was the major problem in compiling the token catalog. Often, the tokens are not yet published and tlms the collections available represent only a portion of me actual assemblages. This is the case, for instance, for Chagha Mish and Ganj Dareh Tepe. In early
excavations~

moreover, tokens were glossed over in the site reports. In some

cases, me lack of publication could be compensated for by studying me material stored in museums, but more often this could not be done. For example, me following statement in the Hassuna report- "pellets ... were found in considerable quantities in every level of the main sounding at Hassuna" 5 - suggests that, in fact, many tokens were collected at the site. However, there is no trace of any such artifact at the Iraq Museum, where the Hasstma material is stored, except for one clay cone and two stone spheres.

The remainder of the "considerable qnantities" of pellets can no longer be accurately docwnented. The three tokens reported for Hassw1a in the catalog are not a representative sample of the original collection. Hassuna is not the only example where the nwnber of tokens excavated does not correspond to the collections at hand. In fact, this state of affairs
is prevalent. Jemdet Nasr, for instance, is another site where, according to the report, cones were found "in great number"; yet only seven specimens are documented. 6 According toM. E. L. Mallowan, cones "were common"

at Arpachiyal1, but only twenty-four can be traced in me reserves of me British Musewn and the Iraq Musewn in Baghdad? The reports also often
communicate incorrect perceptions. For example, because the stone tokens

had more aesthetic appeal than their more modest clay counterparts, they

i~cu~ties in excavating the o mdiCation, for example, Jusa.nd tokens, was nmch s Hassuna, which yielded nber of tokens at each site ms depend greatly upon 1 whereas the next is sternited to small excavated scale horizontal exposure 'xplains why Tell Abada, ::ns, 4 whereas the neighMethods of excavation IS pose a challenge to the 1 g small and blending in >t. Expeditions such as ically sifted, had a better Imps than those where -which are not much those which were most he most popular token marbles and therefore ler the rubric "games." problem in compiling lblished and thus tile tual assemblages. This Dareh Tepe. In early ::: Slte reports. In some I for by studying the ild not be done. For 1ft- ''pellets ... were ain sounding at Has:ted at tl1e site. HowMuseum, where the d two stone spheres. ots can no longer be Hassuna in the cata:tion.

, were often given more attention in the publications, sometimes suggesting Hwt stone specimens were n1ore numerous than the clay ones when the t't:Vcrse was true. At Hasstma, for instance, the only specimens illustrated In the report are two stone spheres. 8 The same thing happens at the site of Amuq and especially at Tepe Gawra, where the stone tokens were published but tl1ree hundred clay specimens were dismissed.' The Ubaid report includes information on a single token, a paraboloid, described as "the tongue of an animal sculph1re." 10 In this case, it is likely that the paraboloid was deen1cd important enough to be published because its form seemed unusual and interesting, while the more inconspicuous types were ignored. As a result, Ubaid appears, probably erroneously, as a w1ique assemblage yielding a complex token but no plain ones. The large number of tokens collected at Jarmo can be explained in several ways. First, Jarmo was a long-term, extensive excavation where the dirt was systematically sifted. Perhaps more important, a member of the team, Vivian L. Broman, was studying clay artifacts. It is likely that her interest generated among the workers the necessary vigilance for finding the objects and keeping them. Furthermore, Broman wrote up her results in her thesis, malting the material available." Her study remains rmique to this day in presenting a detailed report of a token assemblage. It is obvious that, without Broman's work, we today would know as much- or, rather, as littleabout the Jarmo tokens as we do about other Neolithic token assemblages, such as that ofHassrma. The two thousand tokens excavated at Jarmo give us a tantalizing idea of the number of tokens that could be expected at each site. Jarmo was no more and no less tl1an an average farming community in the seventh and sixth millennia B.C. Its token collection should be considered, therefore, as an average Neolithic assemblage. By contrast, the 3 tokens from Hasstma and even the 812 tokens ofUruk, 783 from Susa, and 485 from Tepe Gawra are only a pale reflection of the collections that might have been recovered. The token assemblages now available give at best precarious and at worst unreliable information on the nwnber of tokens at each site and on the frequency of token types. On the other hand, the same data plotted on a map of the Near East create an awesome picture of the vast geographic expanse where the system of reckoning was used (map r).

WHAT ARE

25

TOKENS?

of tokens excavated , this state of affairs vhere, according to Jy seven specimens es "were cormnon" the reserves of the : reports also often ;;e the stone tokens counterparts, they

;I

26

21 33

87 107 47 103

55 76 91 51 73 56
7 34

29

28
36

58
49

84

71 65
88 91:1

27

85 78

83

75

3

0 ~====================~400km
Bold = plain tokens only Italic =plain and complex tokens

2 3 4
5
6

7 8
9

Abdul Hosein Abu Hureira Ain Ghazal AliKosh Amuq An au Arpachiyah Bam pur Beidha

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

Beisamoun Beldibi Belt Cave Can Hasan C,::ayOnii Tepesi Chagar Bazar Chagha Sefid Chcikh Hassan Choga Mami

19 Chogha Bonut Cho,.trha Mirh 21 Dalma Tepe 22 Deb Luran 23 Eridu 24 Para 25 Ganj Dareh 26 Geoy Tepe 27 Ghoraife
20

28 Gird Ali Agha 29 Gird Banahilk 30 Gritille
31

32 33 34 35 36

Habuba Kabira Hadidi Hajji Firuz Hassuna Jaffacabad
J~o

37 38 39 40 41 42 43
44

Jebr!Amda
Jeitun

46

Larsa
Maghzaliyah Malyan Matarrah Megiddo M'lefaat Moussia11 Munhata Mureybet

Jemdet Nasr Jericho Khafajc Kish KS 34
[(5 54

45 KS 76

47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54

Map 1. Distribution of

tokens.

Distribution of Tokens

38
6

s

26

21 33
91

95

'6

5l

29 28 36
58 7l 65

108

7

49

84

99

22

62

48

70

69

92 100 %

8

=

400 km

Larsa Maghzaliyah Malyan Matarrah Megiddo M'Iefaat 52 Moussim1 53 Munhata 54 Mureybet

46

47 48 49 50 51

55 Nemrik 56 Nineveh
57 58

59 60 61 62 63

Nippur Nuzi Rasa! Amiya Ras Shamra Seh Gabi Shahdad Sharafabad

64 65 66 67
68

69 70
7l

72

Shahr-i Sokhta Siahbid Sippar Suberde Sma Tal-i-Iblis Tall+Bakun Tell Abada TcllAgrab

73 74 75 76 77 78 79

Tell Aphek Tell Asmar Tell Aswad Tell Billa Tell Brak Tell es-Sawwan Tell Halaf 80 Tell Kanuas 81 Tell Oueili

82 83 84 85
86

87 88 89 90

Tell Ramad Tell Raschid Tell Songor Tell Yelkhi Tello Telul eth Thalathat TepeA.siab Tepe Bouhallan Tepe Farukhabad

91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99

Tepe Gawra Tepe Gaz Tavila Tepe Giyan Tepe Guran Tepe Hissar Tepe Muradabad Tepe Sabz Tepe Sarah Tepc Sialk

100 Tepe Yahya 101 Tula'i
102

Ubaid

103 Umm Dabaghiyah 104 Uqair 105 u,
106

Uruk

107 Yarim Tepe 108 Zagheh

Map 1. (continued)

Where Tokens Were Handled and Who Used Them

CHAPTER TWO

There is one fact which can be established: the only phenomena which, always and in all parts of the world, seems to be linked with the appearance ofwriting ... is the establishment of hierarchical societies; consisting of masters and slaves; and where one part ofthe population is made to work for the other part.
-CLAUDE LEVI -STRAUSS l

THIS CHAPTER IS DEVOTED to recounting the contexts in which tokens

have been recovered. I describe the types of settlements and stnKtures where tokens were found and the artifacts with which they were associated. Finally, I focus on the rare tokens discovered in funerary contexts because these may yield important information concerning the status of the individuals with whom they were buried.
TYPES OF SETTLEMENTS

The five sites where tokens first appeared armmd 8ooo B.C.- Tepe Asiab and Ganj Dareh E in Iran 2 and Tell Aswad, Tell Mureybet, and Cheikh Hassan in Syria 3 -were remarkably similar. All were small open-air compounds built with characteristic round huts. Among them, the two Iranian settlements were semipermanent, but Tell Mureybet, Cheikh Hassan, and Tell Aswad were fully sedentary, agricultural communities. During the seventh to fourth millem1ia B.C., tokens spread to a great diversity of habitats. In Iran, Belt Cave (inhabited during the Neolithic period) and Tula\ an encampment of nomadic herders, both yield clay counters. 4 The majority of plain tokens, however, come from sedentary villages of rectangular houses, such as Jarmo in Iraq. On the other hand, cmnplex tokens are associated with the ruins of cities having monwnental public architecture. This is the case for Uruk, in Iraq, Susa, in Iran, and Habuba Kabira, in Syria.
DISTRIBUTION WITHIN SETTLEMENTS

In most of the sites where the context of tokens was recorded, the counters were recovered partly within and partly ontside buildings. At Tell Aswad, as at other sites, a good 1nany tokens were located in vacant lots, mixed with animal bones and other debris, in what appear to be trash deposits. 5 At Sharafabad in tl1e fourth millenniwn B.c., tokens were retrieved from an

30

THE EVIDENCE

ancient garbage pit, where it could be determined that the counters were most often associated with early summer deposits but were rarer in layers corresponding to winter trash. Henry T. Wright noted that tokens were apparently discarded after the harvest, the traditional season for feasts. 6 Both in Utuk and in Susa tokens were found in close proximity to the main temples. In Utuk, counters were spotted all over the tell) but 719 examples (88.5%) were excavated in the sacred precinct of Eanna, 43 (5.3%) came from the Ann Ziggurat, and so (6.2%) were from the city's private quarters. It also seems significant that at Susa aln1ost every single trench opened south of the main temple generated tokens, but only a few were recovered in the northern part of the same tell of the Acropolis and in the next tell of the Ville Royale. In both cities, tokens were found in open spaces. At Ea1ma, tokens were scattered about on the grotmds of the Stone Cone Temple? and in the Great Courtyard. 8 The distribution of tokens within settlements suggests two important facts. First, in cities, tokens are more frequent in official rather than secular ,quarters. Second, the discovery of tokens among refuse in vacant lots sug1i1gests that the cotmters were discarded as soon as their function had been '\fulfilled. In other words, they were used primarily for record keeping rather ~an for reckoning. In this regard, the tokens are similar to the archaic tablets of Uruk, also consistently found in dumps, and remind us of the custom that continued in historic tllnes of routinely discarding economic tablets.'

STRUCTURES
The structures which yielded tokens fall into two categories: domestic and public. At Ali Kosh, a few tokens were retrieved from a domestic setting, where they were associated with flint tools and with ground stone mortars a11d pestles. 10 In this case, the tokens give the llnpression of having been discarded when the house was no longer in use, rather than being in situ. The same is true at Seh Gabi, where some tokens were scattered among ordinary houses- here next to a jar, 1 1 there in a hearth. 12 At TellesSawwai1, 13 Hajji Firuz, 14 and Gaz Tavila 15 the tokens were concentrated in storage areas. This was also the case at Ganj Dareh Tepe, where a large quantiry of tokens lay among cubicles situated below the houses. 16 The most interesting finding at Hajji Firuz consisted of a cluster of six cones located in a structure showing no trace of domestic activities, such as cooking or flint chipping. 17 The building also differed from the remaining houses in other ways. First, it was s1naller, consisting of a single room instead of the normal two-room unit. Second, unusual features, such as a low platform and two posts had been erected inside. 18 The structure which yielded most tokens at Hajji Firuz apparently served a special, albeit enigmatic, fi.mction. At Tell Abada, the majority of the tokens, a total of forry artifacts, sometimes kept in vessels, were recovered in Building A, the largest building excavated in the settlement. The size of the building

hi I tb

c~

I

1\! si

'

,j

that the counters \Vl'l'(! JUt \vere rarer in ];l)'t'fN oted that tokens wet'(.i l season for feasts. close proxin1ity to till} ,rer the tell, but 710 l'X·' ct of Eanna, 43 (5.3'X.) ''rom the city's 1 · ~ JSt every single tn:1 , but only a few e Acropolis and in the
h

'v/12118

WHERE 31 TOKENS WERE HANDLED AND "WHO USED THEM

W 2i&G7

Fig. 7. Cache of tokens found in a hearth, Uruk {OaXV 4/5}, Iraq. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

and ren1ind us of · discarding eccmomit presence of infant burials suggested to the excavators "a religious Uk:ance." 19 Uruk, tokens were related to some of the most spectacnlar buildings V, such as the Stone Cone Temple and the Limestone Temple, trenches laid in the city yielded exceedingly few counters. A cache tW<!ntv-tiVe tokens was recovered in situ in the impressive complex of F, G, and H ofEanna (fig. 7). These stmctures, erected at right · arotmd a courtyard, were typical of the monumental architecture at They were bnilt according to the nsual plan, which consisted of a central hall flanked by smaller rooms, and their facades were decorated niches. The sixty-one spheres, seven large spheres, three tetrahedrons, cones, and two cylinders lay on the floor of a room extending to the ·I of Building H, in a large circular hearth with a long appendix of the ttmenstiel type." It is puzzling that tokens were located in fireplaces on occasions, at Seh Gabi and Uruk. It might be hypothesized that they · intentionally placed in the hearth in order to be baked. On the other it is also possible and perhaps more likely that they were brushed into ashes with other trash in order to be discarded. At Susa, tokens also belonged to the temple precinct, where they were ustcrc:ct in a zone devoted to workshops and warehouses. For example, uenem indicates that envelopes holding tokens were excavated in a area. 21 The stnKtures, made of clay and involving decorations made large cones, were divided into small compartments. One of these

dmnestic a domestic settingj h ground stone impression of se, rather than
111

~gories:

were concentrated Tepe, where a the houses. 16 ted of a cluster of · .

ting of a single mal features, such · side. 18 The struct:ur'' erved a special, the tokens, a total vered in Building A, : size of the building

32

THE

houses was still filled with long-spouted jars that held a black, powdery
substance. Seven of the largest and most itnposing houses of Habuba Kabira

EVIDENCE

yielded tokens. These buildings stood out because oftheir typical Sumerian
floor plan and central courtyards. Most of these buildings produced other bureaucratic n1aterials such as seals and sealings, oblong bullae, envelopes, and ll11pressed tablets. Otherwise, flint tools, pottery, and spindle whorls seem to indicate domestic concerns. It seen1s particularly significant that

the southern city gate, which led to the temple, produced not only fifteen tokens but a cylinder seal and nw11erous oblong bullae. In sun1, tokens were often located ll1 storage facilities and warehouses. More important, there is evidence that as early as the sixth millenniun1 B.c. tokens also occur in nondmnestic architecnrre. These public buildings can take the form, over time, of a "temple" as at Untie or of a"s!rY gate as at ·.: :/~_*'-:!' Habuba Kabira.
TOKEN CLUSTERS

Tokens are frequently fonnd in groups varying from two to about one htmdred. At Gaz Tavila, thirty-five cones and one sphere were nestled togemer in the corner of a storeroom. 22 Ganj Dareh Tepe also produced many small hoards of two to thirty-seven tokens of mixed types, tightly packed together in storage cubicles. Tell Abada yielded eleven clusters of four to sixteen tokens. 23 Finally, Urnl< produced the cache of seventy-five tokens composed of spheres, large spheres, cones, tetrahedrons, and cylinders described above. Moreover, there can be little doubt that some of tl1e 155 tokens from level VI of Eanna were also clustered together. The groups of tokens recovered in the buildings ofHabuba Kabira were remarkably small. The house which yielded tl1e largest number produced twenty-one, divided into five rooms in clusters of at most nine tokens. Furthermore, except for House 2, Which held only incised ovoids, the assemblages were always composed of several types of connters. In sum, me evidence indicates mat me aCCOW1tS kept witl1 tokens dealt generally wim ramer small quantities of different kinds of commodities.
CONTAINERS HOLDING TOKENS

At Tell Abada, some tokens were held in pottery bowls or jars and omers were found on the floor. 24 In most other sites, the tokens were located on tl1e floor of tl1e buildings or storage cubicles. Because mey were clustered tightly togemer it is likely that mey had been held in a container which disintegrated in time, leaving no trace. Baskets, wooden boxes, Ieamer or textile pouches are among me possible types of receptacles which might have been used. In texts from me Third Dynasty ofUr, ca. 2000 B.C., mere is perhaps a reference to Ieamer bags being used to hold tokens. Marcel

eld a black, powdery

Sigrist has noted a tablet referring to "1492 fat oxen in the leather bag" which, according to Sigrist, can be understood as "counters representing
I492 oxen kept in archive in a leather bag." 25

s of Habuba Kabira their typical Sun1erian dings produced other

WHER.E 33 TOKENS WERE HANDLED AND WHO USED THEM

)ng bullae, envelopes,

ASSOCIATED ASSEMBLAGES

y, and spindle whorls ularly significant that luced not only fifteen

In the eighth millenniun1 B.C. the first tokens coincide with food production. The fact that counting and accotmting were related to agriculture is

Le.

ities and warehouses.
sixth millennium B.C.

' public buildings can )r of a ciry gate as at

>f:J/,

particularly well illustrated at Mureybet. Here, the first occurrence of tokens (in level III) corresponded with a guannun jump in the quantity of cereal pollen. This implies the cultivation of grain in fields, whereas wild grains were still being gathered in the previous levels (II and I), when tokens were not yet in use. Also, Mureybet III initiated large rectangular silos to store cereals."' Finally, the settlement expanded rapidly, reflecting a
population increase. 27 Subsistence also relied upon grain consumption at

Ganj Dareh Tepe, Tepe Asiab, Tell Aswad, and Cheikh Hassan. On the other hand, none of these five sites, except perhaps Tepe Asiab,28 provided
any osteological evidence for domestication of animals. From the seventh

wo to about one hunwere nestled together

produced many small :s, tighrly packed ton clusters of four to >f sevenry-five tokens ms, and cylinders deat some of the 155 toher. "Habuba Kabira were :st number produced 1ost nine tokens. Fur:::d ovoids, the assem:mnters. In sum, the s dealt generally with

to the early fourtl1 millennium B.c., tokens continued to be typical of agricultural communities. Tokens were apparenrly not related to trade in general or to the obsidian trade in particular. There was no obsidian at Ganj Dareh Tepe, which produced many tokens. Mureybet I and II worked the
prized volcanic glass before tokens cJlne into existence. In the fourtl1 millenniwn B.c. the five sites which produced the largest

assemblages of complex tokens- Uruk and Tello in Iraq, Susa and Chogha Mish in Iran, and Habuba Kabira-Tell Ka1mas in Syria- have striltingly similar assemblages. Altl1ough the cities were separated by several hlmdred
miles, they shared the same characteristic monmnental architecture, deco-

rated with niches and clay cone mosaics." The assemblages also yielded
identical pottery vessels in the same typical shapes and decorations, such as

:res.

;vls or jars and others kens were located on e they were clustered in a container which

four-lugged jars with painted and incised motifs. 30 Each of the sites held, in particular, a great nwnber of crudely manufactured beveled-rim bowls which may have served as measures for the distribution offood rations." The seals and sealings of the five cities were alike, bearing similar motifs. They featured the bearded figure of the Mesopotamian priest-king, the socalled En, in his rypical attire consisting of a long robe in a nerlike fabric and a rmmd headdress." Finally, all five sites except Tello yielded not only envelopes holding tokens but impressed tablets as well. The various features which occur with consistency in the assemblages of sites yielding complex
tokens- the priest-king, public monumental architecture, measures, seals, and complex tokens- represent the elements of an elaborate bureaucracy.

den boxes, leather or
2000 B.c.,

:ptacles which might
there

r, ca.

hold tokens. Marcel

They indicate the presence of a powerful economic institution headed by an En, who acted in public buildings decorated with mosaics and relied upon a control of goods involving seals, beveled-rim bowls, and complex tokens.

34

THE EVIDENCE

It is significant that the architecture decorated with cone mosaics, the beveled-rim bowls, the cylinder seals, and the motif of the En are of Mesopotamian origin but were foreign in Iran and Syria. In fact, they were hallmark features of the precinct of Eanna at Uruk. From this perspective, it may be particularly significant that the large collection of tokens in level VI was associated with the piles of clay cone mosaics nurking the first evidence for decorated public buildings at Eatma. 33 Whereas agriculture is the major comtnon denominator between sites yielding plain tokens, the cities that produced complex tokens shared the same bureaucracy, which had special ties with South Mesopotamia.
TOKENS AS FUNERARY OFFERINGS

On rare occasions, counters were associated with funerary deposits. These burials may provide information on the individuals who were utilizing tokens.

The Sites

I

From the sixth to the fourth millennia B.c., tokens were sometimes laid in burials. Among the five sites which furnished tokens in a funerary context, Tell es-Sawwan, Arpachiyah, and Tepe Gawra are located in northern Mesopotamia; 34 Tepe Guran and Hajji Firuz are in Iran. 35 The custom was practiced, therefore, in a widespread geographic area and cannot be considered a regional development.

The Burials

At each of the five sites, the munber of sepulnrres provided with tokens is very small. Ouly four out of some one hundred thirty burials excavated in Tell es-Sawwan I yielded counters. There was a single case of tokens laid as grave gifts among, respectively, the fourteen interments of Hajji Firuz, the fifty Ubaid graves of Arpachiyah, the thirty graves of Tepe Gawra XVII, and the five graves ofTcpe Gawra XL Finally, only four out of eighty tombs ofTepe Gawra X held COlmters. The total munber of burials including tokens, then, amounts to no more than a dozen. The interments provided with counters were of several types. At Hajji Firuz, tokens were mixed with the disarticulated bones of a multiple burial; 36 at Tell es-Sawwan, Arpachiyah, and Tepe Gawra XVII and XI, tokens were part of simple graves consisting of a shallow pit dug in the earth." Finally, in Tepe Gawra X, tokens were laid in elaborate tombs involving a brick or stone enclosure. 38 The various sepultures furnished with tokens belonged to adult males or children, except in the case of Hajji Firuz, where one of the four individuals of the ossuary may have been a young female. 39 It is striking that nearly all

ith cone mosaics, the ,f the En are of Meson fact, they were hallm this perspective, it 1 of tokens in level VI Icing the first evidence ;riculn1re is the major :okcns, the cities that cy, which had special

erary deposits. These : who were utilizing

these sepuln1res yielding tokens show some unusual features. A first group of burials is characterized by being lavishly furnished. Among them, the graves of Tell es-Sawwan had quantities of alabaster vessels and, in tvvo cases, ornaments of either dentalia shell or carnelian. 40 At Tepe Gawra, the child grave in stran1m XI was unique in holding gold ornaments. 41 In level X of Tepe Gawra, Tombs roz, no, and II4- were among the richest sepultures of the site. They included obsidian, serpentine, or electrum vessels, gold ornaments in the form of studs, beads, or rosettes, stone maceheads, and lapis lazuli seals. 42 A second group of burials was associated with uncommon architectural features. For example, at Hajji Fimz, the human bones deposited with tokens were in the small, unusual building described above. 43 The second example, Tomb I07 at Tepe Gawra, was the sepulture of an adult male who was unique in having a shrine erected upon his re1nains. 44 In this case, the burial gifts amounted to six spheres- and nothing else (fig. 8). Finally, the most puzzling burial, the grave ofTepe Gawra XVII, belonged to an individual with both legs amputated below the knee. 45 The burial at Arpachiyah

WHERE 35 TOKENS WERE Hfu'JDLED AND WHO USED THEM

Fig. 8. Details of selected tomb burials (Tombs 102,107,110,

114}. Reproduced from Arthur J. Tobler,

Excavations at Tepe

Gawra, vol. 2, University
Museum Monographs (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1950}, pl. XXVII; courtesy University

sometimes laid in n a funerary context, ~din northern Meso'he custom was prac:annat be considered

~re

Museum, University

of Pennsylvania.

TOMB 102

TOMB 107

vided with tokens is burials excavated in :ase of tokens laid as ts of Hajji Firuz, the 'Tepe Gawra XVII, out of eighty tombs >urials inclucling to-

TOMB 114

TOMB 110

reral types. At Hajji ones of a multiple n XVII and XI, tolow pit dug in the elaborate tombs in-

·

. ..

,'

;ed to adult males or the four inclividuals ·i!cing that nearly all

A· BEADS B- STONE VESSELS C · STONE SPHERES, ETC 0- MACE HEADS E · OBSIDIAN BLADES F · WHETSTONE G · GOLD ORNAMENTS

TEPE GAWRA
DETAILS OF SELECTED TOMB BURIALS
SCALE I"

~~~----~======~· MtlRE5

H·GOLD ROSETTES J · WOLFS HEAD K- COMBS AND HAIR PINS l · SPATULAS M· SEALS N · POTTERY VESSELS

36

THE EVIDENCE

is the only one which yields tokens but has no other particularly striking fean1res.
The Tokens

Among the many types and subtypes of tokens, four only were recovered in sepuln1res: cones, spheres, three-quarter spheres, and miniature vessels. Among these, spheres were by far most frequently used, occurring in ten of the fourteen burials with a total number of forty-nine specimens. The fortyfour cones were distributed J.Inong only three sepultures, and three-quarter spheres and vessels were present in a single grave. As a mle, only one kind of token was usually represented in each burial. For example, three graves of Tell es-Sawwan contained spheres, but the fourth grave held a cone; 40 Tombs 107 and no of Tepe Gawra held only spheres, but the grave in level XVII held cones." Tomb 102 ofTepe Gawra, however, yielded both spheres and cones.48 Tokens laid in burials were identical in shape to those found in settlements. The only difference between tokens used as funerary offerings and those used in daily life is that the former were often made of stone instead of clay. Nine of the fourteen sepnltures were provided with stone tokens, for a total of sixty-six stone specimens against forty-one made of clay. The stone examples were usually done witl1 great care and show superb workmanship. The spheres, for example, are perfectly rmmd. There is one case at Tepe Gawra, however, when spherical colmters- referred to as ''pebbles" in the report-were left rough. 49 In another instance, six chips of red jasper were seemingly intended to be made into counters, but were never finished. 50 It is possible that tl1e color of stone selected for the manufacture of tokens was meaningful: all spheres were white with the exception of two sets of red spheres (or "pebbles") 51 and a single black specimen. 52 The munber of tokens included in each sepulture varied from a minimum of one sphere at Arpachiyal1 to a maximtun of thirty-four cones in Tepe Gawra XVII. Sets of six spheres ("pebbles") which reoccur in three out of four tombs ofTepe Gawra X, suggest that this number may have had a symbolic significance. The ritual of depositing in burials tokens of special types, material, color and, in particular, number is especially significant, since it lasted for three millennia in several regions of the Near East. Notably, as will be discussed in Chapter 6 below, this ritual gives a valuable insight into the important role of the tokens as status symbols. The fact tl1at tokens occur only in rare occasions in a funerary setting, and only in graves of prestigious individuals, points to their economic significance. It implies that the tokens were a means of controlling goods in the hands of powerful people.
A FAINT SKETCH of the places

and people associated witl1 the use of tokens begins to emerge. Plain tokens began to be used in open-air compounds where subsistence was based on cultivating or, at least, hoarding grain;

r particularly striking

only were recovered nd minian1re vessels. d, occurring in ten of :pecimens. The forty·cs, and three-quarter

;ented in each burial. 1ed spheres, but the :pe Gawra held only J roz ofTepe Gawra,

cmnplex tokens were the invention of the South Mesopotamian temples. The plain specimens remained a familiar fean1re in agricultural communities until the end of the system, whereas the complex ones occur only in administrative centers. Starting in the fifth millennium, tokens arc consistently found in public buildings and warehouses. When they arc in a domestic setting, the counters tend to be clustered in storage areas. The hoards of tokens found in situ range usually fron1 twelve to seventy-five artifacts, showing that both in private and public buildings the counters were never kept in large quantities. They nuy have been stored in leather pouches until the invention of the cylinder seal ushered in the invention of clay envelopes and bullae. Tokens were apparently not reused but were disposed of once the transaction they represented was concluded. There is even some evidence that the counters were discarded after the harvest. Tokens, together with other status syn1bols, were sometimes included in the burials of prestigious individuals, suggesting that they were used by members of the elite.

WHERE 37 TOKENS WERE HANDLED AND WHO USED THEM

tose fom1d in settlenerary offerings and ade of stone instead i with stone tokens, te made of clay. The show superb workd. There is one case ~rred to as "pebbles" six chips of red jasbut were never finthe manufacrure of 1e exception of two

:::cirnen. 52 The numa 1ninimum of one nes in Tepe Gawra 1 three out of four tave had a symbolic

pes, material, color ' it lasted for three lS will be discussed into the important ; occur only in rare ~restigious individat the tokens were eople.

h the use of tokens ton -air compotmds t, hoarding grain;

Strings of Tokens and Envelopes

CHAPTER THREE

When shaking . .. [the clay balls] . .. close to the ear, one can hear the noise ofthe small objects knocking against one another inside. Specimens, broken in the course ofthe excavations, showed that they contained small terra-cotta artifacts ofvarious shapes:grains~ conesJ pyramids) pills 1 em in diameter. - R. DE MECQUENEM 1
IN THE EARLY FOURTH MILLENNIUM B.C. two methods were devised to store tokens in archives. The first consisted of tying perforated tokens with a string; the second, enclosing the counters in day envelopes. Both

techniques insured that groups of tokens representing one account could

be securely held together and that the transaction could be identified by sealings. Interest in these two devices would be esoteric if it were not for
their llnportance in the invention of writing.

STRINGS OF TOKENS
Perforated Tokens

Some tokens show a perforation throughout their thickness (fig. 9 ). The geographic and chronological distribution of these perforated artifacts suggests that they were not a general phenmnenon but were restricted to cmn-

plex token assemblages. The geographic distribution of perforated tokens is close to that of complex tokens. There are no perforated specimens in Turkey or Palestine, but some are represented in particular sites in Iraq, Iran, and Syria. Perforated tokens occur occasionally in plain token collections of the early periods, but they proliferate in the fourth millennium B.C. There are, for example, II9 perforated tokens at Umk, representing 14.7 percent of the assemblage, 189 at Susa (27 percent), and n8 at Habuba Kabira (84 percent).

Solid Bullae

The perforations apparently allowed a string or tl1ong to hold tl1e tokens of a particular transaction togetl1er. If tl1is idea is correct, we may expect that botl1 ends of the string were tied together and secured by sealings identifying tl1e account and preventing any tampering. A category of small bullae,

40

THE EVIDENCE

bearing sealings, could have served this purpose (figs. ro and TI ). The bullae are made of clay. They arc solid, modeled in an oblong or biconoid shape, measure about 7 em in length and 5 cn1 in diarneter. The bullae are covered with sealings and shmv, at both ends, the trace of the strings to \Vhich they \vcrc attached. Bullae arc generally viewed as tags tied onto bales ofn1erchandise. 1 Their interpretation as a device for holding tokens is supported by the fact that the geographic distribution of the bullae also generally coincides with that of cmnplex tokens. At Susa, 3 Chagha Mish,4 and Habuba Kabira,s for example, complex tokens and solid bullae belong to the same horizon and in the same vicinity, although there is no reference in the reports that they were found in direct association. 6 It may be significant that the greatest

Fig. 9. Disks (some
perforated), Uruk, Iraq. Courtesy Vorderasiatisches Museum, Staatliche Museen zu Berlin.

ro and n). The bullae g or biconoid shape, he bullae are covered )trings to which they
~merchandise. 2 Their

'rted by the fact that y coiiKides with that mba Kabira, 5 for exsame horizon and in he reports that they mt that the greatest

nwnbcr of bullae comes from Habuba Kabira, the site that produced the most perforated tokens, and that none has yet been recovered at Uruk, where perfOrated tokens were few. Furthermore, as shown by the i1nprints at both extremities of the bullae, the strings they held were thin and could fit easily in the token perforations. Finally, their close resen1blance to the envelopes described below cannot be coincidental. The two kinds of objects are very similar in appearance: they arc 1nade of the san1e material, share the same size and, sometimes, arc modeled in the san1e oblong shapes. They also bear the same scalings, showing similar 1notifs, including lines of peaceful animals, lions in heraldic posture, and humans performing tasks. In some instances, in fact, an ll11pression of the same seal appears on both types of artifacts. For example, at Susa, a particular seal featuring a line of

STRINGS OF TOKENS Al'JD ENVELOPES

41

Fig. 10. Two bullae, Susa (Sb 6298 and 9279), Iran. Courtesy Musee du Louvre, D8partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

Fig. 11 . Proposed
reconstruction of a string of tokens held by a solid bulla. Drawing by Ellen Simmons.

42

THE EVIDENCE

peaceful animals and a line of felines was impressed on a solid bulla as well as on two envelopes. 7 The number of seals is also the same on solid bullae and envelopes: both have n1ostly the impression of a single seal rolled all

over their surfaces and, on occasion, two or three. In addition, a few ex-

amples of solid bullae at Susa, Habuba Kabira, Tell Brak, and Chagar Bazar
±Cature impressed markings like those borne by son1e of the envelopes, as will be described later in this chapter.s As discussed below, moreover, son1e

of the envelopes may also have involved a system of stringing tokens.
The two kinds of artifacts have two main differences, however. First, the

envelopes were hollow and the bullae were solid. Second, the envelopes
were preferred for storing plain tokens, whereas complex specimens were mostly strung. To be exact, 83.69 percent of the tokens contained in envelopes were plain and 10.57 percent were complex (5.74 percent remain un-

determined). In addition, there are more perforated tokens among complex specimens than there are among plain specimens. It should be emphasized
here, however, that there was cross-over between the two methods. Incised

ovoids, which are complex tokens, were held in envelopes from Habuba Kabira and Umk; punched cones and tetrahedrons, triangles, rectangles, paraboloids, and animals were held in envelopes from either Susa or Uruk, or from both. On the other hand, thirteen plain specimens from Uruk were perforated, as were forty-five at Habuba Kabira (including thirty-five cones) and fourteen at Susa. In sum, the envelopes and bullae are closely related in shape and function, and it is likely that they represent two alternative ways of identifying and protecting tokens to be held in archives. For reasons that we do not know, plain tokens were most often secured by envelopes and complex tokens by solid bnllac. ENVELOPES
The Artifacts

The envelopes consist of spherical or ovoid hollow clay balls measuring about 5-7 em (fig. 12). Their manufacture was simple. The cavity to hold the tokens was shaped by poking a hole into a ball of clay with the fingers, as is shown by traces of fingertips visible inside. The red color of some of the envelopes suggests that the artifacts were baked. The fact that envelopes were fired was confirmed by electron microscopy and differential thermal analysis performed on a sample from Susa 9 Like tokens, the envelopes were balced at a low temperature of about 700° C.
Geographic Distribution and Number

Five out of the eleven protoliterate sites which produced envelopes are located in Iran. These sites arc Shahdad, Tepe Yal1ya, Chagha Mish, Susa, and Farukhabad. One is in Iraq (Uruk), one in Saudi Arabia (Dharan), one

a solid bulla as well same on solid bullae single seal rolled all 1 addition, a few ex~ tk, and Chagar Bazar of the envelopes, as ow, n1oreovcr, some ·inging tokens. >,however. First, the c:ond, the envelopes )lex specimens were s contained in envepercent remain un:ens among cmnplex ould be emphasized 10 methods. Incised opes from Habuba ~iangles, rectangles, ither Susa or Uruk, cimens from Un1k nduding thirty-five

1

STRINGS OF TOKENS AND ENVELOPES

43

Fig. 12. Envelope with six incised ovoids (the full content of the

in shape and funcways of identifying

\
in Israel (Dumal1), and three in Syria (Habuba Kabira, Tell Sheikh Hassan, and Tell Qraya). The distribution of the envelopes is thus spread over a large region which stretches from Iran to the Levant and from Iraq to Saudi Arabia (map 2). The total number of envelopes now known is about
130

envelope was seven
incised ovoids), Uruk

f:N 20987.7),1raq.
Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

ms that we do not

es and complex to-

'Y balls measuring fhe cavity to hold y wid1 the fingers, I color of some of fact that envelopes ifferential thermal

specimens and

70 fragments. The majority, or around roo complete envelopes and 70 fragments, representing 85 percent of the total assemblage, come from Iran.

he envelopes were

envelopes are loJgha Mish, Susa, Jia (Dharan), one

Among the Iranian sites, Susa produced 40 complete, 15 fragmentary envelopes, and 57 fragments. 10 The assemblage of Chagha Mish is sti!ltmpublished, except for 8 complete envelopes recovered in rl1e second campaign and a hoard of more than 20 dnring the third. ii Finally, Farulthabad, Tepe Yal1ya, and Shilidad each produced r example. 12 Iraq has a total of 25 envelopes, all of which come from Uruk. 13 Syria yielded 2 at Habuba Kabira and 3 at Tell Sheilth Hassan.>< The number of envelopes excavated at Tell Qraya is undisclosed. 15 The specimen from Israel, whid1 was purchased on the antiquity market, was said to belong to a lot of 2, originating from the site of Dumili, near Hebron." The sing!e envelope from Saudi Arabia is a surface find, collected near the Dharan airport."

Distribution of Envelope;

IV

-~~~>

'

Map 2. Distribution of
envelopes.

Chronology

The envelopes were in use for at least several centuries. They began being used in the Middle Umk period, about 3700~Jsoo B.c., as shown by the Famkhabad 18 and Chagha Mish examples." They persisted until ca. 26oo B.C. at Tepe Yahya.' 0 The custom of marking the artifacts started as early as Eanna VI~V, about 3500 B.c., as seen at Habuba Kabira. 21 This date is consistent with the information provided by the excavations at Susa,
where seventeen envelopes,originated in level IS 22 and one in level I7, 23 now

equated repectively to Eanna VI and V." Consequently, we know the envelopes of Susa to be contemporaneous with those ofHabuba Kabira. It is
interesting to note that some of the envelopes of level IS were inscribed, but the example of level I7 was not. 25 The markings, therefore, were not a function of time. The discovery of the Uruk clay cases in the Stone Cone Temple

area also suggests a date as early as Eanna VI~ V.
Context

The majority of the envelopes were associated with artifacts typical of Eanna VI~IV and were connected witl1 the South Mesopotamian temple bureaucracy. At Uruk, the twenty-five envelopes were found tucked in a wall in the vicinity of the Stone Cone Temple in the temple precinct of Inanna. This suggests that tbe envelopes were part of tl1e Stone Cone Temple archives and had been discarded, togetl1er with tokens, sealings,

un of Envelopes

. They began being ;., as shown by the persisted until ca. artifacts started as uba Kabira. " This :xcavations at Susa, 1e in level 17, 23 now r, we know the enabuba Kabira. It is Nere inscribed, but ·e, were not a fimctone Cone Temple

and beveled-rim bowls, 26 once the site was abandoned and became a quarry and dumping ground. The envelopes ofSusa, like those ofUruk, came from an area close to an important temple. According to Mecquenem the area where the artit:Kts were found was occupied by buildings divided into small compartlnents, presumably temple warehouses or workshops. 27 In the more recent campaigns, seventeen envelopes with other ad1ninistrative material (including solid oblong bullae, impressed tablets, and beveled-rim bowls) came from a building smne 30 m away frmn the monmnental terrace of the ten1ple; it is highly probable that the building fulfilled some temple function." At Habuba Kabira, the two envelopes were unearthed in the largest and n1ost i111posing house of the city. It was one of several structures at the site that were laid out according to a plan familiar in South Mesopotamia but tmusualll1 Syria, with small romns organized around a central courtyard. The building produced not only the two envelopes and their contents of incised ovoids but various articles used in ach11inistration, such as seals and sealings, complex tokens, oblong solid bullae, and four impressed tablets. The Jimction of the building was certainly related in some fashion to a South Mesopotamian adn1inistration. The setting ofTepe Yahya was similar to that ofUruk, Susa, or Habuba Kabira. It too involved an administrative building, which held plain tokens, tablets, beveled-rim bowls, nose-lugged jars, seals, and sealings. 29 In this case, however, the seals and sealings were typically Elamite and the tablets bore accounts written in the Proto-Elamite script. Tepe Yal1ya shows that envelopes appeared in two settings: related either to the South Mesopotamian temple bureaucracy or the Proto-Ela1nite bureaucracy.
State of Preservation

STRINGS OF TOKENS AND ENVELOPES

45

,rtifacts typical of 'POtamian temple found tucked in e temple precinct f the Stone Cone . tokens, sealings,

The envelopes have been recovered in various states of preservation. Some eighty are still intact, keeping and hiding an unknown number of tokens. Several of the pieces fDLmd whole have been subsequently opened by various methods in order to see their contents (table r). Among tl1em, four envelopes from Susa were punctured with a knife/0 whereas the specimen from Tepe Yahya was carefully cut open at one extremity. As a resnlt, the number of envelopes whose contents are known with absolute certainty atnotmts to no more tha11 five, or a mere 3 percent of the known assemblage. Other envelopes were broken in antiquity but were still associated with their full or partial contents of tokens (table z). This is tl1e case for nineteen examples from Susa, an unknown mnnber from Chagha Mish, five in Uruk, and two in Habuba Kabira. 31 At Farnlthabad, the broken envelope was separated frmn its contents, but the mark of a tetral1edron is visible on the inner wall. 32 Finally, five sets of tokens belonged to crushed envelopes (table 3). The first group comes from Urnlc and consists of fifty-two units, 33

Table 1. Envelopes Found Complete

1
c
~ c 0
u

~

u

~ c 0

g
u

0 u

-o

j c" "' Iii0.

" -" u

i'!

-"

.
1

~ Iii- ~ ~ '0 u '0 ·o ~ ~ c ~

~

"'

-"

-"

-o c ~ u

~

.§
" -"
B

~

-o " -"

e -" "
u

~

~
e

~

b
0 0.

b

-o E -5 j c

1 .s

1
-o
TJ
~

"Eb c
u

~

· " e ·a

"Eb c

~

]"
0
.D
0.

~

..
il

·~
u

-o c " -o c

E

~ 0
E-<
7

c 2

i:b

"

:8
7

:.

Susa Sb 1927 Sb 1936 Sb 1940 Sb 4338 Tepe Yahya

3

1 1

3

2 3 3 6

00

6
00

5
1

5
3

2
1

3

TOTAL

4

2

6

1

6

3

23

the second from Chagha Mish yields sixty-one, 34 and finally, three from Susa held respectively fourteen, seven, and four tokens. 35 X-rays have been used, with unsatisfactory results, to investigate the contents of several specllnens from Chagha Mish, 36 Susa, 37 Dharan, and Dumal1 (table+). Because the tokens are tightly clustered, they hide one another, malcing it difficult to take an accurate count. It is impossible to decide with certainty whether a circular shape is to be interpreted as a sphere or a disk. Furthermore, X-ray photographs do not show incised or punched markings.
Tokens Enclosed in Envelopes

The total number of tokens which belonged in envelopes amounts to 3+5 (table 5). Accordingly, there is an average of 9 tokens per envelope. In reality, however, there are great discrepancies between the nrunber in each of tl1e clay cases: from 2 to r5. Ten types of tokens were found in envelopes (chart 2). The assemblage is as follows: cones 8.n percent (28 specimens), spheres 33.62 percent (n6), disks II-59 percent (+o), cylinders r6.8r percent (58), tetralledrons 13.91 percent (+8), ovoids 6.66 percent (23), rectangles .29 percent (r), triangles .87 percent (3), paraboloids 2.03 percent (7), animals r.r6 percent (+),and undetermined +-93 percent (17). There is yet no evidence tl1at biconoids, bent coils, rhomboids, vessels, and tools were stored in envelopes but, of course, tllis may be because the sample of tokens held in envelopes is so small.

Table 2. Envelopes Found Broken

.0

~ E ~ · ·a "' ·

-:;

.,

·~
~

"
0

I

E E ~ 0

, " "

g"
f-<
7

OJ,
~ 0 0 v

0

~
7

"'
~

~ -" 0 ~ ~ " ~ " -" -" ~ "' ~ -" " · , , -" " 1 ~ E "' -" ~ " E " "' "'

" " 8 " -"
~
0 u
0 0

~

i'!
0 0

:a
·p
v

.:1

0 E " -"

s
u

-"

s
u

0

0

u

Chagha Mish Farukhabad Habuba Kabira Mll:133

1

1

"'

~

0

u 0

~

1·6
2 6

1 ..., ~ ~ "
~
0

"
0

·~
~
0

.s

il
~

a .E

.0

~ , · .§ " "' · "

"'

g '8"
0
f-<

OJ,

~

·

1

5

I

8
1 1 2 6

co
? 11 6
00

2 6

oo
6

5
3 23

co
3

l-------

Mll:134 Susa Sb 1930

7
2 2 4 2 4 2 2 6 1 2 1 2 1 1 1

7
8 2

Sb 1938 3
Sb 1942 Sb 1967

+
00

3

2

15 2

co
2 6

Sb 5340 Sb 6350
Sb 6946

7
6 1

'inally, three from

co co
00

No Re S.ACR.I.771991.1 2049.1 2067.2 2089.1 2111.2 2111.3 2130.1 1

to investigate the sa, 37 Dharan, and ed, they hide one t is impossible to ~ interpreted as a ·t show incised or

3

8

11

3
1

3
2

?

co co
00

7
1

3 7
6

10 8 6

6

7
1 1 1 2

7 3
2 8 6 1

7

2130.4
2142.2 2142.3 2173.4
Uruk W 20987,3

co
3
8 6

s amounts to 345 : envelope. In reLWnber in each of

3
1 4 1 1

5 1

3 7 7
5

co
00

. The assemblage ·es 33.62 percent ;8), tetrahedrons 1 percent (r), trinals Lr6 percent evidence that bi·red in envelopes os held in enve-

w 20987,7

7
2 4 1 1 1 4 48 1 1 2 1 1 46 5

w 20987,8
w 20987,
15
W20987,17

co co co

9 12 3
2 15 1 2 2 162

TOTAL 5

3

11

9

Table 3. Groups of Tokens Separated from Envelopes

u

u u

8
u

c

~

"0 u

8
c .c
u

~

~
~

'i3

~
'

c
0

{i

B

u

J " "'

~

-"

"'

:a
"'
'

J2

]

-"

"

~ > 2 g ll B " :6 " " ] .c .s ~ ·a ·a " ~I § > .5 :a " ""&· ll -" "'
J2
"d

u

u

"
u

8

c

"0 u

e
u u

~

0

i

~

w
B

u

0

e I;

w ;;

u

5 " 0
~

.5

"0 u

-:1
-~

§
B u "d c

:;j
0
f-< f-<

·

~

E

"'

"

Susa No. N. ber
......

ACR 2067.3 ACR 2091.2

_, 3 _l
1
....

f-

I

8

f-6

3
..........

14

I I
5 9 5 3 3 2 4 5 2 2 4 4
--

4 7

Chagha Mish Uruk W 20987.27

12

13 26

2

10

.......

11 8
8

c"'52 138

TOTAl

16

47

2

11

9

22

3

Table 4. Tokens Tentatively Determined by X rays

0 u

c

~

0 u u

c

~

0 u

c

~

-"

"'

" c " "'
u .c u

B .c
u

~

c c ~ u e .c .:; u ~ c " g " .c ~ ·a > 2 g .c 0 "0 ~ u u u ~ B .c .:; " " .c 8 " u u ~ ·g " u M " c .c " c ·a ·a > "" ~ ~ " -" :a u ~ _w " "' "' 0 .5
I

"0 u

:9 u ~ w -§ c w c

§
-,;

c

"
u

~

B

·E

"'

~

·o

E

·

c "
0

B u

~ 0
f-<
10

:i.l
:OS

c

~

"

Dharan ~-----------+-+-+~--~+------Dumah
Susa Sb 1932

10

3
7 7
13

3 9?
22

9

TOTAL

Table 5. Totals

0 u

~ 0

~ g c .c B e " · "0 0 E u ~ B .c ~ ~ " .c " "0 " ~ .c u " u u 0 -§, ~ g !!> 0 " ~ ·o 0 " ~ j 00 ~ :a u B -" -" " "' "' "'
~ 0
0 u "0

c c ~ u

~ 0

g .c
6 3 2
1?

~

.:;
"@

~

1
5 5

] § ~ ~ w 0 B u 0 E "0 -~ · · ·a 0 .s B B ·s "' · 0
"0
~

.

"0 u 0

"

0

~

f-<

Envelopes Found Complete
Envelopes Found Broken Separated Tokens okens Determined by X rays

4 5 16

1 1 1

2

1
11

6

3 1

23

48
47

9

48 9

12
22

3

2

15 3

1 3

2 5

2 2 4 13.

162 138
22?

11
1?

9

7?
25 2 1

TOTAL

104 12

24

15

1

58

34

12

2

18

1

3

7

4

17

345

"d

E "' " a " " '" "
1

6 0

-:s

c

v

"§
"d

v

§

0

~

f-;

14
----

4

7
4 2
2
--

--

_61_
52

4
5

4

138

Cones, spheres, and tetrahedrons are featured in nvo difi:Crent sizes, small and large; there are flat, lenticular, and high disks; there are exa111ples of incised ovoids and animals and of punched cones and tetrahedrons, bringing the number of token subtypes represented in envelopes to nineteen. Among the nineteen subtypes, twelve are plain subtypes and the remaining seven are complex. The former include cones, large cones, spheres, large spheres, flat disks, lenticular disks, high disks, cylinders, tetrahedrons, large tetrahedrons, ovoids, and rectangles. The latter consist of ptmchcd cones, punched tetrahedrons, incised ovoids, triangles, paraboloids, and two types of animal shapes. As a result, among the 345 tokens enclosed in envelopes, 287 are plain, 32 are complex, and 26 are undetermined (including the 22 tokens included in X-rayed envelopes which cannot show markings). In other words, 83.19 percent of the tokens enclosed in envelopes are plain, 9.28 percent are complex, and 7.54- percent are undetermined. The tokens enclosed in envelopes are identical in types and subtypes to those found loose. Furthermore, the tokens contained in clay cases ·also occur in different sizes: there are, for ex31nple, spheres and large spheres; they bear the same kind of markings, incised or punched. The selection is smaller, probably because the assemblage is also smaller.

STRINGS OF TOKENS AND

49

ENVELOPES

"d

Markings

-:s ~ JO

§

c

v

'"

~

§
·a

~ "d
c
10

· "
3

~ 0
f-;

'i!

c

~

It was a great advantage to have groups of tokens secured in clay cases, often bearing seals of authority. Most envelopes are covered with seal im-

:i1

10

3 91 9

PLAIN TOKENS
2. Spheres 3. Disks

13

22

1 Co_'_" \}

..--_--_-_-_-_.-._t ;:F V I ·_
. ·.. :.~-~
.

C\

::

v

6. Ovoids

7. Rectangles

-:s § ~ ~ ~ .D · -§ "0 0 '" · "

"0 0

"

0
~ 0
f-;

COMPLEX TOKENS
1. Cones 2. Tetrahedrons 6. Ovoids

·

23 2 2 2 4 13. 7 4 17 162 138 22?
10. Parabollae

e

8. Triangles

----~ ::-·
__

5

345

~ ··-·.

.;_

Chart 2. Tokens
included in envelopes.

50

THE EVIDENCE

Fig. 13. Envelope covered with one cylinder seal impression, Susa (Sb 1935),

Iran. Courtesy Mus8e
du Louvre, D8partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

pressions. As a rule, a single cylinder seal was impressed all over the artifact (fig. 13), but there are instances when two or three different seals were used. The major drawback of the envelopes was that they concealed the counters: once the tokens were enclosed, they were no longer visible. While the string of tokens could be checked at all times, it was not possible to verify the contents of an envelope without breaking it and, therefore, without tampering with the sealings. It was probably to overcome this difficulty that systems of markings were developed. The term marking is used to refer to notations on envelopes, sign for notations on tablets. Before proceeding to the description of these various markings, it should be emphasized that the total number of marked specimens arnow1ts to only nineteen specimens, or 9 percent of the total nwnber of artifacts. Envelopes bearing markings are now attested in three sites: Susa, Habuba Kabira, and Tepe Yal1ya. The rarity of envelopes bearing markings can perhaps be attributed to excavation luck; othenvise, it seems to indicate that the usage was not widespread. One method of showing what was inside the envelopes consisted of attaching a set of tokens, presumably identical to those enclosed, onto the outer surface of the case. This was done by sinlting the counters in the clay when it was still soft. This method is represented by a single fragment from Susa, displaying two plain cylinders embedded in the surface (fig. 14) .38 The fact that only one example was recovered suggests that the method was not widely used. Fourteen envelopes, including twelve at Susa 39 and two at Habuba Kabira, bore marltings impressed into their surface when the clay was still soft. In this technique, the markings were shown in one-to-one correspondence;

ill over the artifact
1t seals

were used. aled the cmmters: '· While the string ;ible to verify the )fe~ -without tam:his difficulty that is used to refer to

that is, each token enclosed was indicated by one 1nm·king on the surface of the case. For exa1nple, an envelope holding six tokens displayed six markings. This is supported by the fact that all the envelopes of this category, recovered intact, have a nun1ber of n1arkings equal to the nmnber of tokens enclosed. In other words, only broken envelopes show a discrepancy between the number of markings and the number of associated tokens. The markings indicated not only the number of tokens included but also the shape of each counter. For example, Susa Sb 194-0 yielded three lentiniIar disks and three cylinders which were shown by three circular and three long markings (fig. rs). Nine subtypes of tokens were represented in the thirteen envelopes bearing impressed markings. These include small, large, and punched cones, spheres, lenticular disks, cylinders, incised ovoids and, perhaps, parabolas and animal shapes. Examination of the markings shows that little systematization was used to depict the various tokens, except for spheres and disks. These were translated by different circular markings: the former took the shape of a deep punclil, whereas the latter was a wide, shallow depression. Cones were impressed in several ways, either in profile,40 with the tip, 41 or with the base. 42 In this last instance, the token represented was a large plmched cone, which was thus shown by a shallow circular marking of an even greater diameter than that of a lenticular disk. The cylinders appear as long wedges. The incised ovoids were shown by an oval impression with a small ridge left by the incision at the maximum diameter. There were several ways of impressing the marltings in the soft clay. The

STRINGS OF TOKENS AND ENVELOPES

51

tark:ings, it should s amounts to only ·tifacts. Envelopes Lbuba Kabira, and perhaps be attribilat the usage was

;s consisted of at1elosed, onto the 1unters in the day ;I.e fragment from Lee (fig. 14-). 38 The ' method was not

·o at Habuba Kaclaywas still soft. :correspondence;

Fig. 14. Envelope with a set of tokens sunk into the sutiace, Susa (Sb 5340), Iran. Courtesy Musee du Louvre, D!§partement des Antiquites Orientales.

Fig. 15. Envelope bearing impressed markings corresponding to the tokens held inside, Susa(Sb 1940), Iran. Courtesy Musee du Louvre, oepartement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

most direct, illustrated by M II: 134 of Habuba Kabira, was to press tbe tokens against tbe surface of tbe envelope before enclosing tbem inside. There can be no doubt about this technique, because tbe incised ovoids, found associated witb tbe Habuba Kabira envelope, fit perfecdy in tbe oval cavities left in tbe clay case about fifty-five hundred years ago (fig. r6). It is tempting to speculate tbat tbe metbod of embedding actual tokens into tbe surface of envelopes led to d1e metbod of showing tbeir negative imprint. The second envelope of Habuba Kabira and most examples from Susa exhibited yet anotber metbod of conveying tbe information. In tbese cases, tbe markings were not stamped wid1 tokens but were in1pressed wid1 a stick or stylus. 43 Finally, traces of fingernails(?) on circular in1pressions of a Susa envelope suggest d1at tbey may have been done witb tbe dmmb. 44 Anotber technique consisted of marlting the envelopes when tbe clay was already dry (perhaps as an afterthought?). Consequendy, tbe markings were scratffied ratber tban impressed, malting it more difficult to render tbe shape of tbe counters. In botb specimens of this category tbe number of markings matched tbe tokens but d1eir shape did not. In tbe first example, which comes from Tepe Yal1ya, tbere is litde difference between tbree signs meant to represent two spheres and a cone (fig. 17). In tbe second specimen, from Susa, no effort was made to match tbe shapes of six spheres, which were sin1ply indicated by six strokes, whereas a large sphere and flat disk were shown, apparendy, by a circular and a triangular punch mark.45 Seven specin1ens, again from Susa, were punctured tbrough tbe thickness of tbe wall at diametrical ends. 46 The perforations have been interpreted by some as a means of preventing tbe artifacts from brealting while firing. 47 It is more likely, however, tbat tbe perforations allowed tbe passage of a string holding a nun1ber of tokens duplicating tbe set inside. The per-

STRINGS OF TOKENS AND ENVELOPES

53

, was to press the >sing them inside. he incised ovoids, erfectly in the oval ; ago (fig. r6). It is oal tokens into the negative imprint. oles from Susa exJn. In these cases, ,ressed with a stick )ressions of a Susa thumb. 44 Jes when the clay ntly, tl1e markings :icult to render the ·ry the number of the first example, ::tween three signs second specimen, ;ix spheres, which here and flat disk nchmark. 45 hrough the thick; have been inter·m brealcing while lowed the passage 't inside. The per-

Fig. 16. Envelope bearing the impression of incised ovoids, Habuba Kabira (M II: 134), Syria. Photo by Klaus Anger; courtesy Museum fur Vor- und FrOhgeschichte, Berlin.

·
forated envelopes can be considered, therefore, as yet another possible technique for indicating the contents of envelopes. In all cases except one, the information conununicated by the markings on the envelopes pertained to the number and types of the tokens enclosed. A unique envelope of Susa, marked with a cross, shows on the X-ray photograph a yield of eight tokens!' In tl1is case, the sign apparently did not communicate the number or the shape of the tokens inside. Instead, the

Fig. 17. Envelope bearing three markings, scratched in after the clay had dried, Tepe Yahya, Iran. Courtesy Peabody Museum, Harvard University.

54

THE EVIDENCE

infOrmation concerned, perhaps, the nature of the transaction. Alternatively, the marking could be an accountant's colophon. that many techniques were devised for showing the token contents of envelopes: ( r) attaching tokens to the smface; (2) stamping the tokens in the soft clay; (3) impressing signs with a stick or stylus; (4) pressing with the thumb; (5) scratching the clay when hard; and (6?) securing by a string. Most proved to be dead ends and disappeared. But token in1pressions and markings inscribed with a blunt stylus were carried over to the first tablets. They were the beginning of writing. Envelopes, which started as an accessory to the token system, can1e to transform it in the most unexpected way. They triggered the mutation of the threedimensional tokens into two-dimensional graphic symbols. This unique event was to have important consequences for cmnmunication.
IT IS INTERESTING

J1Saction. Altcrna-

Impressed Tablets

CHAPTER FOUR

d for showing the surface; (2) stamph a stick or stylus; · when hard; and ; and disappeared. blunt stylus were ; of writing. Envecaine to transform ation of the threebois. This unique cation.

And when we consider the first uses to which writing was put, it would seem quite clear that it was connected first and foremost with power: it was used for inventories) catalogues) censuses) laws and instructions; in all instances) whether the aim was to keep a check on material possessions or on human beings) it is evidence ofthe pvwer exercised by some men over other men and aver worldly possessions.
-CLAUDE LEVI ~STRAUSS l

THE SYSTEM OF MARKINGS

on clay envelopes ushered in a new phase of the token system. At first, the impressed notations were ancillary to the counters, bnt eventnally they supplanted them. This occurred when solid clay tablets bearing impressed signs replaced tbe hollow envelopes holding tokens. These impressed signs still perpetuated tbe shape of tbe tokens, but tbey assumed an entirely new function. Whereas the markings on envelopes repeated only the message encoded in the tokens held witbin, tbe signs impressed on tablets were the message. The first tablets were a decisive step in the invention of writing and amounted to a revolution in commtmication technology. This chapter deals witb the earliest tablets bearing signs in the shape of tokens. I will docmnent the number of these artifacts recovered and recount their geographic distribution (map 3), context, and chronology. I will describe tbe tablets and tbe signs they bear. Most important, I will trace the evolution from tokens to markings on envelopes and impressed signs on tablets. Finally, I will show that impressed signs are tbe immediate forerunners of the Sumerian pictographic script.
NUMBER

The total number of impressed tablets, complete or fragmentary, included in the present study a1nounts to about 240. The 1najority, some rso specimens, come from Iran. The 90 tablets from Susa have been recovered in successive excavation campaigns from 1912 to 1977. 2 Forty-two specimens were excavated in Godin Tepe, 3 Il from Sialk,' and I from Tall-iGhazir. 5 Six of an undisclosed number of impressed tablets are published for Chogha Mish. 6 The number oflraqi exanaples is about 67. Information is available on 65 impressed tablets from Uruk.' There is a single specimen from Khafaje' and a fragment from Nineveh.' There are 25 tablets from Syria, witb ro coming from Habuba Kabira, 10 IJ from Jebel Aruda, 11 I from Tell Bralc, 12 and I from Mari. 13

iii;;: rro

'""" Sii ~
0

~

0
0

~

"'
Distribution of Tablets

W+E
N

s

· Tell Brak
Marie

Nineveh

e Godin Tepe
· Tepe Sialk

· Khafaje

0

400km

CONTEXT
In the sites yielding impressed tablets as well as envelopes, the two kinds of
artifacts are found in the same context. At Susa, tablets and envelopes were located in the same area of the Acropolis, in some cases in the same building and the same room and, in one instance, even in the same container. 1'1

IMPRESSED TABLETS

57

Building 2 of Habuba Kabira produced impressed tablets as well as envelopes.15 Forty tablets from Uruk belonged to the sancmary ofEanna, as did twenty-five envelopes. An additional twenty were discovered in the Anu Ziggurat, the second major sancn1ary ofUruk, where so far no envelopes have been uncovered. Several of these tablets lay in situ on the floor of the White Temple. 16 AB a rule the impressed tablets were located, like the envelopes, in temple precincts and administrative buildings. At Godin Tepe, the largest cache of tablets came from the gate house at the entrance of the compound, and a second group came from an imposing building probably used for official functions. 17

CHRONOLOGY
The impressed tablets can be divided into three closely consecntive gronps, ranging from about 3500 to JOOO B.C. The first group, dated to ca. 3500 B.C., includes the impressed tablets of Susa rS and Habuba Kabira. Some of the tablets from Eanna and Chugha Mish might also belong to the period ofUruk VI. The tablets ofSusa 17 date between 3300 and JIOO B.C. They are contemporaneous with the twenty-nine tablets of the Red Temple of Uruk and with those of the Anu Ziggurat in Urulc IVa. 18 The forty-three tablets of Godin Tepe, including one specimen bearing an incised sign, may be included in this second group, 19 together with those from Jebel Aroda, whose
carbon 14 dates cluster around 3200
B.C.
20

0

The tablets of Sialic and Tall-i-Ghazir, associated with high beveled-rim bowls (Blumentopf), Proto-Elamite sealings, and lugged jars with rope applique bands, belong to the third group, estimated to Umk III and Susa r6, or about JIOO to JOOO B.c. The seal impression on the Nineveh tablet suggests a similar date, although it has been assigned to level V, dated to 29002500 B.c. 21

The chronology of the impressed tablet is important because it clearly demonstrates that impressed signs preceded pictography by an interval of
about two hundred years, or some eight generations. There are no picto-

graphic texts contemporaneous with the earliest group of impressed tablets from Susa r8 and Urulc VI-IVc. The earliest evidence of pictography consists of a group of tablets recovered on the floor of Temple C, in Uruk Oc XVI 3: "On the floor, uuder the collapsed roof of Temple C's T-shaped
hall, in level IVa." These seven tablets may be as early as Uruk Nb 22 or as

late as IVa. 23 Consequently, it is about

JJOO-JIOO B.C.,

during tl1e period

58

THE EVIDENCE

of the second group of impressed tablets, that the two kinds of writing began to coexist. This is illustrated at Godin Tepe 24 and at Sialk, where the two types of tablets were found together. 25

DESCRIPTION

All the in1pressed tablets were made of clay, except for twenty-two plaster specimens recovered in the Anu Ziggurat ofUruk. 26 The tablets are small, fitting comfortably in the palm of the hand. On average, they are about 5 em wide, 4 em long, and 2 em thick. They are modeled in various shapes, with the lack of standardization typical of a new craft. A number are oval, some r0lmdish, others square or rectangular. The profile of the tablets is also highly variable, and while most specimens are convex, some are flat and still others are plano-convex. Many of these documents were authenticated by seals. The seal impressions cover the impressed signs, showing that the tablets were first inscribed and then sealed.

THE SIGNS

For the salce of clarity, I call the notations on tablets signs, whereas those on envelopes are referred to as markings. Seventeen signs can be identified on the impressed tablets.
l. SHORT WEDGE
A. small (fig. rS)
B. large (fig. 19)

20) D. sideways E. apex to apex (fig. 21)

c. plmched (fig.

Fig. 18. Tablet showing a line of four circular signs followed by a line of four short wedges, Godin Tepe (Gd 73-i9), Iran. Courtesy T. Cuyler Young, Jr.

kinds of \Vriting I at Sialk, where the

/0

IMPRESSED TABLETS

59

twenty-two plaster 1e tablets arc s1nall, they are about 5 em arious shapes, with 1ber are oval, some · the tablets is also me are flat and still e authenticated by )Wing that the tab-

, whereas those on n be identified on

Fig. 19. Tablet with three large wedges, one shallow circular marking, and four deep circular markings, Susa (Sb 2313), Iran. Courtesy Mus8e du Louvre, 08partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

Fig. 20. Unlisted sign similar to a token in the shape of a cylinder with all-over strokes (type 4: 10/11), Uruk (VV 20973), Iraq. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

60

THE EVIDENCE

2. DEEP CIRCULAR
A.

B.

c.
D. E. F.

small (fig. r8) large semicircular incised (fig. 22) punched appen<.lix

Fig. 21. Tablet with five short wedges, two triangular signs, and

one apex-to-apex sign,
Godin Tepe (Gd 73291), Iran. Courtesy

T. Cuyler Young, Jr.

Fig. 22. Impressed

tablet with deep circular incised and triangular
incised signs, Susa

(Sb 1975 bis), Iran. Courtesy Musee du Louvre, D8partement des Antiquites Orientales. Drawing by
Ellen Simmons. (The tablet is shown upside

down.)

IMPRESSED TABLETS

61

Fig. 23. Impressed tablet, long wedges, Susa (Sb 6291), Iran. Courtesy Mus8e du Louvre, 08partement des Antiquit8s Orientales.

3. SHALLOWCIRCULAR
A.

lenticular

B. flat (fig. 19)

4. LONG WEDGE (fig. 23)

5. OVAL
6. TRIANGULAR
A.
B.

plain incised (fig.

22)

The Layout

Most tablets are inscribed on tbe obverse only, but some bear additional notations on the reverse or along the edges. 27 In the latter two cases~ each face presents a separate account~ and in no instance does the reverse indicate a total, as is tbe case in later pictographic tablets. Some tablets were turned like tbe page of a book to read the second face, 28 but otbers were turned on a horizontal axis. 29 The signs are normally organized in horizontal lines parallel to tbe longer side of tbe tablet. Signs of clifferent types are usually not mixed within the same line. Instead~ each line consists of identical signs. For example, a line of circular signs is followed by a line of wedges (fig. 18). When there are only a few signs in a line, tbey are placed in the center, rather tban to tbe side. The signs are by no means randomly aligned but are organized in hierarchical order. The largest units, placed at the top of tbe tablets, are followed by lines of signs of decreasing value. For example, a line of circular signs standing for large measures of grain precedes a line of wedges, which, as will be shown later, represented smaller units of grain (fig. 18). Because each line consisted of series of identical signs, tbe tablets could

62

THE EVIDENCE

Fig. 24. Impressed tablet, boustrophedon, Godin Tepe (Gd 73292), Iran. Courtesy

T. Cuyler Young, Jr.

be read in any direction. Several specimens indicate, however, that writing usually proceeded from top to bottom and from right to left and perhaps continued in the opposite direction (boustrophedon). Among these examples, a tablet from Godin Tepe has a complete line of signs in the upper part of the tablet and the two last units are added below (fig. 24 ). 30 Sb 2313 from Susa illustrates how, on the few occasions when a line is composed of different signs, the larger units were at the right, followed by lesser units toward the left. Since the scribes placed the signs in hierarchical order, starting with the largest units, we may logically deduce that the signs on the right were written before those on the left (fig. 19). Finally, tablet 73-292 of Godin Tcpe has a line starting from the right and a second line starting from the left, or boustrophedon (fig. 24). 31
The Technique of Impression

The techniques for impressing signs on tablets were the same as those used for envelopes. Signs were still made by pressing tokens against the surface of the tablets. This is visibly the case for Sb 2313 of Susa (fig. 19 ), which bears three large wedges showing distinctly the entire outline of the cone used for impressing them. The signs corresponding to pinched spheres, biconoids, ovoids, and triangles had to be impressed with tokens since no stylus could have achieved such shapes. In other cases, circular signs and wedges were impressed with a blw1t stylus. Some signs can be described as representing a mixed impressed/incised technique (signs 2d and 6b above). On Sb 1975 bis from Susa, a token triangle was impressed four times on the face of the tablet, and each of these triangular impressions was completed by a vertical incision performed with a pointed stylus (fig. 22), reproducing a triangle with an incised line (type 8: n).

The Evolution from Tokens to Signs

IMPRESSED TABLETS

63

Each of the seventeen impressed signs can be traced to a token prototype. Considering the limited sampling of nineteen marked envelopes and 240 tablets 1 it is remarkable that in seven instances the develop1nent fron1 tokens to markings on envelopes and signs on tablets can be fully documented. The relevant infonnation will be presented below, as fOllows:

A. B. C. D. E.

A type of token found at large. The same token enclosed in an tmmarked envelope. The corresponding marking on the surface of an envelope. The matching sign impressed on a tablet. The occurrence on a pictographic tablet as an i1npressed sign, an incised pictograph, or an impressed/incised sign. F. The proposed translation.

that writing to left and perhaps . Among these exf signs in the upper . (fig. 24). 30 Sb 2JIJ line is composed of wed by lesser milts rchical order~ startIt the signs on the tally, tablet 73-292 econd line starting

~wever~

A complete list of all the artifacts involved will not be given. Where possible, a tentative interpretation of the signs will be provided._ These interpretations correspond to those of M. W. Green and Hans J. Nissen, 32 Hans J. Nissen, Peter Damerow, and Robert K. Englund, 33 Adam Falkenstein,34 Joran Friberg, 35 or A. A. Vainlan. 36 It should betmderstood that the Smnerian standardized units which these authors are citing reflect the highly orgarlized city-state society of the late fomth to early third millennia. The meaning of the signs and of their prehistoric token prototypes will be discussed in the concluding section of this chapter. la. SHORTWEDGE Cone, type r: r. Unmarked envelope: ChoghaMish, 37 Susa. 38 c. Marking on envelope: Tepe Yahya (fig. 17),39 Susa. 40 D. Impressed sign: Chogha Mish, 41 Godin Tepe,42 Jebel Aruda, 43 Khafaje,44 Sialk, 45 Susa,46 Urulc. 47 E. ATU 892/ZATU N-r (impressed). F. Measure of grain (r ban?). 48
A.
B.

same as those used against the surface sa (fig. 19 ), which 'utline of the cone nched spheres, bih tokens since no circular signs and

Comment: On the envelope Sb 1927, from Susa, cones were represented by pressing the tips of the counters into the clay, rather than pressing the complete counter sideways, thns resulting in mostly circular markings. 49 This same technique was perhaps perpetuated on one tablet of Susa. 50

impressed/incised Sus a, a token triand each of these 'n performed with ll an incised line

lb. LARGEWEDGE Large cone, type r: 2. Unmarked envelope: Chogha Mish." c. Marking on envelope: Susa." D. Impressed sign: JebelAruda, 53 Susa (fig. 19). 54
A.
B.

64

THE EVIDENCE

E.
F.

ATU 899/ZATU N-34 (impressed). Measure of grain (I8o ban?). 55

lc. PUNCHED WEDGE
Ptmchcd cone, type 1: 19. B. Um11arked envelope: None. c. Marking on envelope: Susa. 56
A.
D.

E.
F.

Impressed sign: Uruk (fig. 20). ATU 905/ZATU N-48 (impressed). Measure of grain (r,8oo ban?). 57 Unit ofland measure (r efe?). 58
Comment: The only punched cone enclosed in an envelope was
translated by the impression of its base, leaving a large circular mark-

ing rather than a ptmched wedge. ld. HORIZONTAL WEDGE
A.

Cone, type r: r.

D. Impressed sign: Godin Tepe. 59 E. ATU 9I8 (impressed).

F. Fraction. 60

Unit ofland measure (I/4 iku?). 61 le. TWO WEDGES APEX TO APEX
A. D. E. F.

Cone, type I: I Impressed sign: Godin Tcpe (fig. 2I). 62 ATU 9I8 (impressed). Measure of grain ( r/ro ban?). 63

2a. CIRCULAR SIGN Sphere, type 2: r. Unmarked envelope: Chogha Mish, 64 Susa,'·5 Uruk. 66 c. Marking on envelope: Susa, 67 Tepe Yahya." 69 D. Impressed sign: Godin Tepc, Jebel Aruda,'0 Habuba Kabira, 71
A.
B.

KhafJje, 72 Nineveh, 73 Sialk,74 Susa,7 5 Uruk:/6
E. F.

ATU 897/ZATU N-14 (impressed). Unit of grain (I bariga?). 77
Comment: In one instance an envelope holding six spheres showed
six strokes on the outside. 78 The markings were scratched when the

clay had already hardened and when it was no longer possible to
i1npress the tokens.

2b. LARGE CIRCULAR SIGN
A.
B.

Large sphere, type 2: 2. Enclosed in unmarked envelope: Chogha Mish, 79 Susa. "'

D.

c. Marking on envelope: None. Impressed sign: Susa, 81 Habuba Kabira, 82 Jebel Anlda. 83 E. ATU 9IJ/ZATU N-45 (impressed). F. Unit of grain metrology (10 bariga?)." Comment: None of the envelopes containing large spheres featured 1narkings. It can only be presumed that large spheres came to be represented by deep circular rnarkings, larger than those standing for small spheres. This hypothesis is supported by impressed tablets, such as those of Habuba Kabira, showing the existence of deep circular markings of different sizes and organized in separate lines. 85

IMPRESSED TABLETS

65

n an envelope was large circular mark-

2c. SEMI-CIRCULAR Half sphere, type z: 24. Umuarked envelope: None. c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Godin Tepe," Sialk."
A.
B.

Comment: The half sphere is one of the earliest token subtypes; it is found in many assemblages but never occurs in large numbers. This explains, perhaps, why none has ever been recovered in an envelope and why the corresponding sign is also infrequently used on tablets.

2d. CIRCULAR SIGN WITH ONE INCISION
A. Notched sphere, type 2: 7·

Umuarked envelope: None. c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Susa (fig. 22)."' E. ATU 898/ZATUN·IS (impressed). F. Measure of grain(?) (I bariga?). 89 Unit ofland measure (I/8 iku?). 90
B.

·uk. 66

2e. PUNCHED CIRCULAR SIGN Habuba Kabira,"
A.

Punched sphere, type 2: 3.

B. Umuarked envelope: None.

c. Marking on envelope: None.
D. Impressed tablet: Tall-i-Ghazir." E. ZATU N-so (impressed). F. Unit ofland measure ( w bur?). 92

six spheres showed scratched when the longer possible to

2f. CIRCULAR WITH AN APPENDIX
A. Pinched sphere, type z: 15. B. Unmarked envelope: None. c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Susa. 93

9

Susa.so

66

THE EVIDENCE

E.

F.

ATU 781/ZATU 24-0 (incised). Fat-tailed sheep.
Comment: The sign ATU 781/ZATU 24-0 shares the same outline
but bears an additional incised cross.

3a. SHALLOW CIRCULAR MARKING

Flat disk, type 3: I. Unmarked envelope: Chagha Mish/4 Susa,95 Uruk. 96 c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Susa. 97 E. ATU 907 (impressed). F. Unitofgrainmetrology(1). 98
A.
B.

Comment: Lenticular disks (type 3: 3) are represented by shallow circular markings on two envelopes from Susa. 99 However, none of the envelopes containing fiat disks bears markings. It can only be hypothesized tbat tbey too were represented by large shallow circular markings showing, probably, a more defined outline tl1an the lenticular disks. The value of the fiat disk may be hypotl1esized from tbe tokens with which tbey are associated. It is probably meaningful tbat in four instances when disks witl1 straight edges were included in envelopes, they were associated with small spheres 100 or with small and large spheres. 101 The association of spheres and flat disks in envelopes seems to correspond with the association of deep and shallow circular impressed signs on tablets. 102

3b. CIRCULAR SIGN DERIVING FROM THE LENTICULAR DISK
A.
B.

Lenticnlar disk, type 3:

IO.

Unmarked envelope: Susa. 103

D.

c. Marking on envelope: Susa (fig. rs).'" Impressed sign: ChoghaMish,'" 5 JebelAmda, 106 Susa, 107 TellBrak, 108
Uruk.I09
F.

Unitofanin1alnumeration (10 animals?). 110
Comment: Lenticular disks held in envelopes were mostly associated witl1 cylinders. 111 When these two kinds of tokens are translated into marltings, tbey appear as shallow circnlar markings and long wedges. Accordingly, I presmne that when circular signs are associated on a tablet witb long wedges, they can be understood as deriving from tbe lenticular disk. 1 "

4. LONG WEDGE
A. B.

Cylinder, type 4-: 1. Unmarked envelope: Susa,' 13 Uruk. 114

es the same outline

c. Markings on envelope: Susa (fig. 15). 11 s 116 D. Impressed sign: Godin Tepe., Habuba Kabira., 117 Jebel Aruda., 118 Susa (fig. 23), 119 Tell Brak, 120 Uruk. 121 122 F. Unit of animal numeration (1animal?).

IMPRESSED TABLETS

67

Sa. OVAL
A. Ovoid, type 6:
B.
D.
I.

rulc96

Umnark.ed envelope: Uruk. 123

c. Marking on envelope: None. Impressed sign: Chagha Mish, m Habuba Kabira, 125 Jebel Aruda.""

5b. INCISED OVOID
A.

·esentcd by shallow

9

However, none of ngs. It can only be

Ovoid witl1 an incised circular line, type 6: 14. B. Unmarked envelope: Uruk (fig. 12).'27

large shallow circu'd outline tl1an the · hypotl1esized from robably meaningful -dges were included
spheres 100 or with

c. Marking on envelope: HabubaKabira (fig. 16). 128 D. Impressed sign: None. E. ATU 733/ZATU 393· F. Oil.
Comment: The incised ovoid is included here even though it is not represented on an impressed tablet but only as a marking on an envelope. On the envelope M II: 134, from Habuba Kabira, it is clear tl1at the markings were made by impressing the colmters into the clay wall, for the resnlting oval impressions show a small ridge corresponding to the incision on the token. There is conflicting information concerning M II: 133. In tllis case, the markings may be simple wedges done with a stylus.

'heres and flat disks ciation of deep and

'JCULARDISK

6a. PLAIN TRIANGULAR
A. Triangle, type 8: 2.

Susa, 107 Te11Brak, 108

~e mostly associated

kens are translated markings and long

Enclosed in unmarked envelope: Uruk, 129 Chagha Mish. 130 c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Godin Tepe (fig. 21). 131 E. ATU 935/ZATUN-39a (impressed). F. Measure of grain (1/5 ban?). 132
B.

lar signs are associnderstood as deriv-

6b. INCISED TRIANGULAR Triangle with a median incised line, type 8: B. Unmarked envelope: None. c. Marking on envelope: None. D. Impressed sign: Susa (fig. 22). 133 E. Impressed/incised sign: Susa. 134 F. Unit of wheat(?) 135
A. II.

68

THE EVIDENCE

BEYOND THE IMPRESSED TABLETS: PICTOGRAPHY

The docun1entation presented above shows that the impressed tablets represented only a transitional phase of writing leading to pictography- in this case, the graphic representation of tokens. The chart on pages 69-70 illustrates how son1e of the impressed signs were supplanted by pictographs traced with a sharp stylus. For example, oval and triangular signs evolved into incised pictographs, while still other signs bccan1e impressed/incised. On the other hand, wedges and circular signs remained impressed, creating a dichotomy bcnveen two kinds of scripts: impressed and pictographic. In the following section, I will discuss how the en1ergence of two different scripts may be explained by the two kinds of prototypes: plain and complex tokens.

The Tokens as Prototypes of Impressed Signs

The most common types of tokens, which pervaded the entire Near Eastcones, spheres, disks, and cylinders- gave rise to the most common in1-

pressed signs. These counters, including punched cones and spheres, are also among the most ancient token shapes, occurring among the earliest
assemblages of Tepe Asiab and Ganj Dareh Tepe and persisting witbout discontinuity until the fourth millennium B.C. Perhaps most significant, cones, punched cones, spheres, disks, and cylinders are among the subtypes most frequently held in envelopes and, subsequently, most commonly translated into impressed markings on tbe surface of envelopes. This suggests tlut tbe fashion in which tokens were kept in archives detennined the resulting script. Sign impression was the most ancient and also the most rudimentary of tbe two early forms of writing. The major drawback of tbe impressed techtuque was tl1e blurring of the shapes of tbe token prototypes. For example, tokens of distinctive forms- such as cones and cylinders, or disks and spheres- were transcribed, respectively, into closely related wedges or circular signs. As a result, tbe signs were identified by context ratber tl1an by shape. Thus, short and long wedges representing cones and cylinders were distinguished by tbeir position on tl1e tablet: tbe long wedges were systematically placed near the edge of a tablet, 136 whereas rl1e short wedges were traced at the center of the field. 137 The circular signs deriving from spheres and lenticular disks could be set apart by their association witb otber signs. Those standing for spheres were combined with short wedges,' 38 tbose representing lenticular disks were combined witb long wedges. 139

The Tokens as Prototypes of Impressed/Incised Signs

Notched spheres (type 2: 7) 140 and incised triangles (type 8: n) were tbe prototypes for impressed/incised signs. These signs are very important because tbey attest to tl1e close relationsllip between impressed and incised signs. They show, beyond any donbt, tl1at tbe incised pictographs came

IY
Sign Token
Enclosed

pressed tablets rep·o pictography- in trt on pages 69-70 1ted by pictographs gular signs evolved impressed/incised. impressed, creating 1d pictographic. In ce of two different plain and complex

in mvclope

Marleing on envelope

Sign imp1-essed on tablet

Incised pictogmph

IMPRESSED TABLETS

69

x signifies occurrence; a blank signifies no evidence

La

l.b

Lc

X

entire Near Eastnest common im~s and spheres, are among the earliest persisting without

l.d

:res, disks, and cylnvelopes and, subukings on the sur11 tokens were kept

l.o:

X

Jst rudimentary of he impressed techypes. For example, iers, or disks and Lted wedges or cirtext rather than by md cylinders were vedges were systeshort wedges were ving from spheres 1 with other signs. :dges, 138 those rep~es. 139

2.a

0

X

·

2.b

0

X

·
D

·

pe 8: n) were the ·ery important be~essed and incised pictographs came

70

THE EVIDENCE

Sign

Tolun

Enclosed in en11e!ope

Ma1·king on em,elope

Sign impressed on tablet

Incised pictOlf1'aph

x signifies occurrence; a blank signifies no evidence

l.e

®
\..1

n

2.f

e
.

.

3.b

.. 0
I I
I

0: ~
~
I

4

S.a

(;j
lA \/

~

I

·

S.b

'

6.a

6.b

impressed blet

Incised pictograph

I

~

as the third and final step of the evolution from tokens to writing. The incised triangle is of particular interest since one can trace it through the following four stages of evolution: (1) complex token, (2) impressed sign, (3) impressed/incised sign, and (4-) pictograph. Although the incised triangles were among the more frequent subtypes of fourth-millennium complex tokens, none so tar has been found enclosed in an envelope. ln1pressions of incised triangles occur on the ''solid clay ball" of Susa. 141 The impressed/incised sign that followed consisted in complementing a triangular token impression with an incised marking (fig. 22).'" Finally came the pictograph ATU 900.
The Tokens as Prototypes of Incised Pictographs

IMPRESSED TABLETS

71

X

Four more impressed signs/markings evolved into incised pictographs. The technique was not new: tokens had been marked by incised lines as early as the beginning of the system in the eighth millennium B.c., and incised markings became especially important with the complex tokens of the fourth millennium. However, the use of a stylus to trace signs on a tablet followed the impressed script, constimting a third stage in the evolution of writing in the Near East (after markings on envelopes and impressed signs). The resulting incised signs had the advantage of being far more legible than those which were impressed. The incised signs represented with greater accuracy the profile of the token prototypes, as well as the marltings displayed on their surface. This was an important feature because the pictographs derived mosrly from complex tokens characterized by linear marltings. Among the impressed markings which evolved into pictographs, the incised ovoids (type 6: 14-) are most important because rl1ey can be traced at each of the four steps of the evolution. First, incised ovoids were among the 1nost common complex tokens in fourth-millennium sites; second, they were held in unmarked envelopes at Uruk; 143 third, rl1ey appear as impressed markings on an envelope from Habuba Kabira; 144 and fourth, rl1ey become the incised pictograph ATU 733/ZATU 293. There is, however, no known corresponding impressed sign. The rl1ree remaining token subtypes perpetuated both by impressed signs and pictographs include pinched spheres (type 2: 15), plain ovoids (type 6: r), and plain triangles (type 8: 2). These tokens can be matched to ATU 781/ZATU 24-o, 145 ATU 732/ZATU 280, 709, and ATU 4-28/ZATU 254-. All these tokens are typically complex and, except for the plain ovoids, are never part of assemblages prior to the middle of the fourth millennmmB.C. The last and most important category of complex tokens that contributed to the Sumerian pictographic script has thus far not been identified in envelopes. That is perhaps because so few envelopes are known, but more likely it is because, as I have discussed in the previous chapter, complex tokens were often perforated and therefore were probably attached by a string when they were held in archives. Their listing includes rl1e examples in rl1e chart on pages 72-78.

Token Type

Pictograph

Tmnslation

l. Animals
3: 14
ATU 803 ZATU 482c lamb

3: 51

ATU 761

sheep (fig. 25)

ZATU 575

3: 54

ATU 763

ewe

ZATU57l

v
~

14: 3

ATU 45a ZATU 12

cow

14: 8

ATU 30 ZATU 145

dug

Fig. 25. Sign ATU 761/ ZATU 575, "sheep," Uruk 0fV 21418.4), Iraq. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

Tmnslation

Token Type

Pictograph

Translation

1. Animals
lamb
ATU 535 ZATU 196

2. Foods
bread

sheep (fig. 25)

ATU 733 ZATU 393

oil

'w'

ATU 539 ZATU 197

food

cow

ATU 428

sweet (honey?)

ZATU 254

dog

ATU 750 ZATU 503

sweet (honey?)

ATU 139

ZATU 88b

0

ATU 158 ZATU 296a

sheep's milk

3. Textiles
ATU 758
textik: 117

ZATU 452b

ATU 798

wooJHS

ZATU 452b

Token Type

Pictograph

Translation

~

3: 22

<J1ID>
3: 24

ZATU 452c

type of garment or cloth

· @
.

·
0

Zi\TU 452b

type of garment or cloth 14~

3, 28

ATU 755 ZATU 555

type of garment or cloth 1-'U

e
Fig. 26. Sign ZATU 452e, "textile," Uruk 0N 9657), Iraq. Courtesy Deutsches Archaeologisches lnstitut, Abteilung Baghdad.

8

3, 30

ATU759 ZATU452e

type of garment or"cloth 151

3, 32

ZATU452e

type of garment or cloth (fig. 26) 152

Translation

Token Type

Pictograph

Translation

type of garment
or cloth

EB:
IT:IrriJ]
4: 23

I II I II If!

type of garment or cloth 15 '

type of garment or dothl19

PI 385 ZATU452a

wool, fleecc 15f

type of garment
or clothl5o

ATU 508

rope

type of garment
ordothl5r

7: 18

ATU 589 ZATU764

type of mat or

rug

type of garment
or cloth (fig.
26)15~

10:4

ATU 390/829 ZATU 662/663

type of garment or cloth 155

10: 9

type of garment
or clothl56

10: 12

(\

PI 158

type of garment
or cloth 157

ATU685 ZATU644

type of garment or cloth 158

4. Types of Containers
ATU736 ZATU394

Tolun Type

Pictograph

Translation

7: 31

ATU 568 ZATU 616

gr,marv

13: 6

ATU 674 ZATU 126

5. Commodities
I: 38, 39

ZATU 267

pcrfi.rme

8: 14

ZATU63

metal

8: 15

ATU 545

metal

8: 17

ATU 703 ZATU 301

mct.tl

8: 18

ATU 545 ZATU 63

mcml

9o 13

ZATU 293

bracelet. ring

l4o lO

ZATU 379

bed

Translation

Token T_vpe

Picto'-qraph

Translation

granary

5. Commodities
perfUme

o6 ' ®
CD

6. Service/Work
5: I ATU 526 ZATU 280
make, build

7. Miscellaneous
1: 33 ZATU N 38
numlx:r(?)

unrecorded

(W 21090)

3: 19

CD

ATU 754 ZATU 127

metal

4: 20
metal

ZATU 779

4: 24
meml

unrecorded

(W 20973) (fig. 20)

metal

()

ATU 403 ZATU 659

ATU 406
hracekt, ring

ZATU 661

bed

Token Type

Pictograph

Translation

6: 1

D
0

ATU 732 ZATU280

nail(?)

7: 12

ATU 559

ATU709

·e
~

8: 37

ATU712 ZATU83

ATU434

ATU 434

' [L

ATU429 ZATU 293(?)

16:6

ATU17 ZATU82

foot

Translation

nail(?)

Comment: The meaning of tetrahedrons remains enigmatic. They are among the plain tokens which arc both consistently found at large and most frequently included in envelopes. It is to be expected, therefOre, that they vvcre perpetuated in writing. However, none of the envelopes that hold tetrahedrons bears i1npressed markings; nor do we yet have an impressed tablet with triangular i1npressions. It is possible that the tetrahedron represented a docket or unit of work. 159 The tetrahedron correlates with the two triangular signs ATU 403/ZATU 659, identified by Rene Labat as !agar ("temple servant"), 100 or to ATU 526/ZATU z8o, KAK (du3), traditionally interpreted as "1nake, build.'' Clay dockets in the shape of tetrahedrons were used, for example, at Sip par in the third and second millennia B.C."' The date and name of individuals written on the dockets malce it clear that the objects were 1neant to be exchanged against rations of barley as wages. Perhaps these late dockets perpetuated both the shape and the meaning of the prehistoric tokens. This idea seems plausible, for manpower was an iinportant co111111odity of exchange in the ancient Near East. This is attested by the numerous texts referring to workmen digging canals, constructing buildings, and harvesting fields. If the tetral1edrons truly represent a lmit of work, it wonld be logical to assume that the various sizes of the tokens expressed time units such as one day's work (or one week's or one month's), unless they referred to different salary rates according to the size of a team or the kind of labor.
IN SUM, certain tokens, mostly plain, were perpetuated by in1pressed signs while otl1ers, mostly complex, were transcribed into incised pictographs. It is evident that complex tokens, characterized by multiple markings, did not lend the1nselves to being i1npressed and were more conveniently translated by signs traced with a stylus. However, tl1e reason why two different styles of script developed may lie in the way tokens were handled in various offices. Cones, plmched cones, spheres, disks, and cylinders were mostly kept in envelopes- and tl1erefore carne to be translated by impressed markings. On the other hand, complex tokens were perforated and strung and thns were never transcribed into impressed markings. In turn, the different ways of keeping tokens in archives may be explained by the sort of goods each type of token represented. The plain tokens represented products of the far1n and the countryside, whereas complex tokens stood for goods manufactured in the city. It is therefore logical to assnme that the two types of tokens were handled by different hands in different offices. It is noteworthy that the incised ovoids were exceptional in being sometimes kept in envelopes and sometimes perforated in order to be strung. At Untie, for example, in tl1e collection of tl1irty incised ovoids, ten were held in envelopes (fig. rz) ' 62 and five 163 were perforated. This may explain why the incised ovoids were transcribed both into impressed and incised signs.

IMPRESSED TABLETS

79

foot

80

THE EVIDENCE

THE MEANING OF SIGNS AND THEIR CORRESPONDING TOKENS

The key to understanding the meaning of pictographs, impressed markings and, ulti1nately., tokens lies in the ctmeiform script of the third millennium B.C. Assyriologists can, in some instances., trace the evolution of cuneiform characters backward through more and more archaic forms to their prototypes in the late fourth millennium B.C. The interpretation of pictographs and impressed signs proposed here is the outcome of such research by A. Falkenstein, M. W. Green, S. Langdon, K. Szarzynska, and A. A. Vaiman, all of whom assun1ed that, logically, the original signs carried the sJ111e meaning as the derived cuneiform signs. In nwn, it is logical to trust that the impressed signs perpetuated the meaning of their token prototypes.

c s· 'I

Impressed Signs

Plain Cones, Spheres, and Flat Disks: Metrological Units of Grain(?)
Thureau Dangin in 1932 had inferred that the impressed wedges and circular signs stood for metrological units used specifically for grain. 164 This is also the outcome of more recent work by A. A. Vaiman, Joran Friberg, and Hans J. Nissen, Peter Damerov, and Robert K. Engllmd. '" Friberg proposed that the short wedge represented a unit of grain, possibly the ban, the most basic Sumerian measure of cereal, which was equivalent to about 6 liters of grain. According to Friberg, a unit six times larger, the bari!Ja,' was represented by a circular marking. ' 66 It appears that the shapes of the signs for grain metrology derive from tokens in the shape of cones and spheres. The small cone apparently represented a small w1it of grain in common use. Moreover, the sphere is to be understood as a second, larger, basic unit of grain. Large cones and spheres represent still larger wlits of grain metrology. According to Friberg, the large wedge, which would correspond to the large cone, was equivalent to 180 ban of barley. The wedges shmvn sideways or apex to apex were fractions of a ban. Furthermore, it appears to be meaningful that in the four instances when flat disks were included in envelopes, they were associated with small spheres 167 or with small and large spheres. 168 The association of spheres and flat disks in envelopes seems to correspond with the frequent association of deep and shallow circular impressed signs on tablets. I therefore propose the possibility that spheres, large spheres, and flat disks represent a sequence of three measures of grain corresponding respectively to such later Sumerian wlits as 1, 10, and (?) bariga. These three circular signs could correspond to ATU 897, 913, and 907. It should be assumed, however, that during prehistory, cones, spheres, and disks represented nonstandarclized measures of grain. They referred probably to containers in which the goods were traditionally handled, such as a "small basket," a "large basket," or a ~'granary." These units might be compared to such present-day infonnal measures as a "cup of sugar" and a

impressed markings he third n1illennium 1lution of cuneiform ::mns to their protoltion of pictographs such research by A. , and A. A. Vaiman, ns carried the same logical to tmst that Jkcn prototypes.

''pitcher of beer." As a result, the prehistoric units should be assumed to be entirely nonmathematical entities. Until the late fourth mille1mium B.C., a sphere cannot be considered as a precise multiple/fraction of a cone or disk. The n1easure.·.; probably did not become standardized n1etrological units before the late Uruk period or the early historical period, when their ratio was as follows:

IMPRESSED TABLETS

81

Grain measures: Sasystem, after J6ran Friberg, The Third

CEREALS

Millennium Roots of Babylonian Mathematics {G6teborg:
Chalmers University of Technology and University of G6teborg,
j

a-----o------0-----0-----v
BAN

5

6

10

3

BARIGA

978- 1979), p. 10.

(Grain(?) d wedges and circufor grain. 164 This is , Joran Friberg, and md. 165 Friberg proo, possibly the ban, equivalent to about s larger~ the bariga; at the shapes of the shape of cones and mit of grain in comsecond, larger, basic arger units of grain vhich would correbarley. The wedges

The Punched Cones and Spheres: Units ofLand Measurement(?) The Sumerian system of land measures include such lmits as the bur) efe) and iku and fractions or multiples thereof represented by circular signs and wedges, some bearing a punctation or an incision. 169 The similarity in appearance of these signs with the p1mched cones and with the notched and punched spheres suggests that these tokens may have been used to indicate units of!and. The similarity of shape between counters indicating grain and land measures may, in turn, point to a cmnmon practice in early societies of calculating land measurements in tenns of the quantity of seed necessary for sowing. 170 The tokens indicating milts ofland carmot be considered to have represented standardized measures during prehistory. It is only in the late fourth or early third millennium B.C. that they became increments of a specific ratio, as follows:

Land measures: After J6ran Friberg, The Third

LAND

Millennium Roots of Babylonian Mathe-

matics (G6teborg:

four instances when :ociated with small 1tion of spheres and j_Uent association of [ therefore propose isles represent a sectively to such later :ircular signs could

b_--D-----ITD·--o---8
IKU ESE BUR BURU

6

6

3

10

Chalmers University of Technology and University of G6teborg,
j

978- 1979), p. 46

)fy, cones, spheres, rain. They referred >nally handled, such 1ese units might be cup of sugar" and a

The Cylinders and Lenticular Disks: Units for Animal Counts(?) Joran Friberg identified a special accounting system used to keep track of animals in Elan1 that was also used in U ruk. 171 These signs consisted of a long wedge, which I propose to view as the rendering of a cylinder (type 4: 1), to represent one animal. Tlus assumption is supported by an envelope from Susa, Sb 1940, which bears three long wedges on its surface, corresponding to three cylinders held inside. m According to Friberg, the sign for ten an.i1nals was a circle, which I interpret as the graphic representation of a lenticular disk (type 3: w). This is also supported by the Susa envelope Sb 1940, which held three lenticular disks translated into three circular markings on its face. 173 If this interpre-

82

THE EVIDENCE

Animal units: After J6ran Friberg, The Third Millennium Roots of Babylonian Mathematics (G6teborg: Chalmers University of Technology and University of G6teborg,

tation is correct, the lenticular disk is a unique cxan1ple of a token expressing a group. I assume that the prototype lenticular disk 1neant a "flock." Only in the late fourth or early third millennium can the impressed circular sign be identified as standing for a precise nun1ber: "ten animals." Cylinders as well as lenticular disks, it seems, were used to count animals, with no specification of age and sex. Because sheep and goats \Verc so con1mon in Mesopotamia and Elan1, it is probable that the animals in question were mostly small livestock.

ANIMALS
~---o--x
The plain tokens, which were both the most cmnmon and the most ancient counters, stood tOr quantities of staple foods- grain and livestockand for measures ofland. They gave rise to parallel sequences of impressed signs, the first being metrological units of cereals, the second standing for numbers of animals, and the third representing area of land. The tokens/ signs of these three sequences are not often combined in a single envelope or on the same tablet. In one instance, however, lenticular disks were associated with cones in an envelope from Susa. 174 This particular account stood, perhaps, for quantities of fodder allotted to a munber of animals. In stun, the meaning of the fourth-millennium plain tokens can be extrapolated backward from the impressed signs of the fourth to the third millennia B.C. But what about the cones, spheres, disks, and cylinders extracted from the prehistoric layers of the eighth to the fifth millennia B.C.? Can one assume that they held the same significance as those of the fourth millennium? There is no way to know. The only clue they might hold is the fact that signs and symbols have a pervasive endurance which makes them withstand time in a unique fashion. This is exemplified, for example, by our symbols for numerals- r, 2, 3, etc.- which have remained practically unchanged since their inception in 700 B. c. Mter all, symbols are instituted for the purpose of communication, and any deviation- in their use would create miscommlmication and confusion. Disjunction in S)llnbolism, as argued by Terence Grieder, occurs only as a result of drastic social or environmental change. 175 No such upheaval is known to have occurred between the Neolithic and the Chalcolithic period in the Near East. On the contrary, that time is known as a cultural plateau characterized by a great stability. Another vexing proble1n concerns whether or not cones, spheres, disks, and cylinders carried the same meaning from the Mediterranean coast to the Caspian Sea. While the question cannot be answered, several arguments offer support for the idea that they did. First, it is easier to borrow than to reinvent. Second, the cones, spheres, disks, and cylinders were among the easiest shapes to make and, according to the law of least effort, represented the most common staples: grain and animals. Now, cultivated grain and

10

10

1978- 1979), p. 21.

c of a token exprcsslisk meant a ''flock." 1e impressed circular n animals." ;ed to count animals, l goats were so com. anin1als in question

dmnesticatcd animals were common throughout the entire Near East, malcing it particularly easy to borrow the system wholesale. Third, the tokens were concept signs, independent of phonetics, and could be shared by people speaking different languages. Again, tokens can be compared to our numerals, which origlluted in India and arc now used on the greatest part of the planet, standing for the same concepts ±or the innumerable people who express them in different languages.
Incised Signs

IMPRESSED TABLETS

83

on and the most anmin and livestockuences of Unpressed second standing for >fland. The tokens/ in a single envelope Lilar disks were asso; particular account unber of animals. Ln tokens can be exfourth to the third cs, and cylinders exfifth millennia B. c.? ; those of the fourth .ey might hold is the : which malces them for example, by onr tined practically unnbols are ll1stituted in their use would in symbolism, as aric social or environ:curred between the ;t. On the contrary, {a great stability. )nes, spheres, disks, :literranean coast to :i, several arguments r to borrow than to ers were among the t effort, represented :ultivated grain and

The tokens identified by pictographs likewise stood for units of merchandise, leading to the conclusion that during its entire existence the token system was an accounting device restricted to keeping track of goods. Some of the complex tokens were used to keep accounts of animals and quantities of grain. They differed from the plain tokens, however, in showing greater precision. Cylinders and lenticular disks represented so many head of livestock but the complex counters indicated the species ("fat-tailed sheep," type z: I5), the sex ("ewe," type 3' 54), and the age ("lamb," type 3' I4). The quannun jump in the number of token types and subtypes which occurred in large cities about 3500 B.c. seems to reflect a need for greater accuracy. On the other hand, most of the complex tokens found in the large centers of the fourth millennium B.C. stood for finished products, such as bread, oil, perfume, wool, and rope, and for items produced in workshops, such as metal, bracelets, types of cloth, garments, mats, pieces of furniture, tools, and a variety of stone and pottery vessels. The multiplication of token shapes in the protohistorical period, therefore, signals the addition of manufactured products to the goods accounted for in the temples. Accordingly, plain and complex tokens varied not only in their shapes, markings, and the way they were hanclled and stored but also in the types of commodities they represented. The plain tokens stood for products of the countryside, the complex ones for goods manufactured in cities.
Numerals

The invention of numerals on pictographic tablets provided a new formula to express numbers of tmits of goods. We know from the token contents of envelopes that tokens were repeated as many times as the number of items counted. "One jar of oil" was shown by one token standing for a jar of oil; "two jars of oil'' by two such tokens, "three jars of oil" by three tokens, and so on (figs. I2 and I6). This rudimentary system was replaced on pictographic tablets by numerals or signs used to express abstract numbers, such as 1, z, 3, etc. As a result, the pictographs were never repeated in a one-to-one correspondence to indicate the number of units involved, as was still the case for impressed signs. Instead, the pictographs were preceded by a numeral. For example, the sign for "jar of oil" was preceded by the sign for I, 2, 3, etc. The sign for I was a short wedge, identical to the sign for a small measure

84

THE

EVIDENCE

of grain; 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. were indicated by two, three, fOur, or five wedges; the sign for ro was a circular sign, identical to that for a larger measure of grain. In the same fashion, the sign for 6o \Vas a large wedge; f()r 6oo, a punched large wedge; and that for 3,6oo, a large circular sign. 176 It appears that the in1pressed signs, while retaining their primary meaning as grain measures, acquired a secondary meaning as nmnerals. This phenomenon of bifurcation is particularly explicit on tablets where, in the same text, identical signs are used alternately to express grain measures or numerals. Tablets recording the rations allotted to workers, for example, feature the same signs to indicate the number of workers paid and the quantities of grain they received. 177 The same is true in the Proto-Elamite system of writing. 178 Numerals created an econon1y of notation, since thirty-three jars of oil could be shown by six signs: three circles and three wedges. The importance of this bifurcation in the meaning of signs cmcially marks a cognitive departure in the quantification of goods.
THE PLACE OF IMPRESSED TABLETS IN THE EVOLUTION OF WRITING

The impressed tablets constitute the third step in the evolution from tokens to signs. They followed the stage of tokens and markings on envelopes and, in turn, were supplanted by pictography. ' The link between impressed tablets and envelopes is demonstrated by the many features they share. First, the impressed tablets adopted the same material from which envelopes were manufactured: they were modeled in clay. The tablets were also modeled in the same general shape and size as their immediate precursors. Adam Falkenstein noted that the earliest pictographic Uruk tablets were sometimes strikingly convex: perhaps they perpetuated the roundish shape of the former envelopes."' Of course, envelopes and tablets had a different structure. The envelopes were hollow, since their purpose was to hold and protect a number of tokens. As tokens carne to be eliminated, the tablets were naturally solid. The seal impressions covering the entire surface of most envelopes and tablets constitute another important similarity between the two types of artifacts. Not only were these sealings made by the same types of sealsnamely, mostly cylinders and more rarely stamp seals - bnt they also showed similar patterns carved in the same style. Featured among tl1e many motifs which occur on both types of artifacts, for example, arc temple representations and various types of vessels. 18° Furthermore, occasionally at Susa 181 as well as Uruk 182 a number of tablets and envelopes bore the impression of the same seal, attesting that the two ways of keeping records were handled by the same temple services or individuals. Most important, the signs of the impressed tablets are comparable- in form, technique, and disposition- to the signs displayed on envelopes. First, the same signs reoccur on both types of artifacts. In particular, all the markings impressed on envelopes- shott and long wedges, deep and shal-

our, or five wedges; a larger measure of ~ wedge; tOr 6oo, a ar sign. 176 It appears y 1neanmg as grain "his phenmnenon of the same text, iden~s or numerals. Tab)le, feature the same quantities of grain ystem of writing.r7s

low circles and ovals- continue unchanged in the repertory of signs on tablets. 183 The list of signs impressed on tablets, however, is longer than that of the markings on envelopes. This may be explained by the small sampling of 19 envelopes bearing markings, compared to some 240 impressed

IMPRESSED TABLETS

85

tablets. Also, by the time tablets were in usc, the scribes had already exploited further the possibilities offered by two-dimensionality, creating new

signs. Thus, they manipulated the wedge, turning it sideways (sign rd) or doubling it (sign 1e).
Second, the techniques most frequently used to in1press 1narkings on envelopes prevailed on tablets. Thus, signs were still1nade by pressing to-

irty-threc jars of oil
~es. The importance arks a cognitive de-

)lution from tokens ;son envelopes and,

kens against the clay face of the tablets, as is visibly the case on Sb 2313 (fig. 19); otherwise, it was usual to use a blunt stylus (fig. 18). Third and finally, the signs were presented on the tablets in horizontal parallel lines, following the same hierarchical order as on the envelopes. One envelope from Susa, for example, displays a line of circular signs followed by a line of wedges, in exactly the same way signs were presented on a tablet. " 4 In turn, this may reflect tl1e hierarchical order and the parallel rows in which tokens were organized by prehistoric accountants. The fimction of impressed signs and of envelope markings, however, was radically different. The discrepancy lay in the role they played vis-a-vis
the clay counters. On envelopes, for the convenience of accountants, the

is demonstrated by :s adopted the same ey were modeled in il shape and size as hat the earliest picx: perhaps they per-

markings merely repeated the information encoded in the tokens within. By the tablet stage, however, the signs had altogether replaced the tokens. The format inherited from the envelopes by tl1e impressed tablets was to enjoy a long life. Clay continued to be used to make tablets, in the same
cushion shape and bearing seal impressions, until the Christian era. 185

Also, the same disposition and hierarchical ordering of signs persisted for
centuries. 186 Even the function of the tablets remained 1nostly economic

79 Of course, enve:; were hollow, since :ns. As tokens came

throughout the ages. The technique of writing, however, evolved from crudely impressed signs to the more legible incised pictographs and would later be done witl1 a more functional triangular stylus.

i

I

nost envelopes and

n the two types of ne types of sealsils - bnt they also ed among the many Jle, arc temple rep-

xe, occasionally at

elopes bore the imof keeping records

;,

re comparable- in tyed on envelopes. :n particular, all the ges, deep and shal-

