Special  Issues:  ga114 Date  Published:  7/30/1996 www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=45 Arthur  and  Marilouise  Kroker,  Editors

The  History  of  Communication  Media
Friedrich  Kittler

Introduction
What  follows  is  on  attempt  to  discuss  the  history  of  communication  technologies  -  as  far  as  this is  humanly  possible  -  in  general  terms.  The  objective  is  ultimately  the  outline  of  a  scientific history  of  the  media  -  an  outline  for  the  simple  reason  that  media  sciences  is  a  new  field  of research  which  would  not  exist  had  it  not  been  for  the  triumphal  advance  of  modern  information technologies.  This  is  why  such  a  history  comes  up  against  methodological  and  practical problems. One  practical  problem  is  that  communications  technologies  themselves  are  documented  to  a far  lesser  extent  or  are  far  less  accessible  than  their  contents  vide  the  manner  in  which  the intelligence  services  have  remained,  despite  their  frequently  decisive  role  in  wars  (to  quote  the last  head  of  the  Wehrmacht  intelligence  service,  "the  Cinderella  of  military-historical  research"  1 Then  there  is  the  methodological  problem  posed  by  the  conundrum  of  whether  the  now  so  self- evident  term  "communication"  can  properly  be  used  in  connection  with  times  and  locations which  manifestly  were  characterised  by  other  terminology  (drawn  from  mythology  or  religion).  At any  rate  its  enthronement  in  philosophy  was  based  in  John  Locke's  "Essay  on  Human Understanding"  on  the  scarcely  generalisable  assumption  that  communication  means  the rendering  into  speech  of  perceived  ideas  and  consequently  the  linking  of  isolated  individuals through  "bonds  of  language".2  The  only  trouble  is  that  philosophy  omits  to  enquire  how,  without language,  people  are  supposed  to  have  arrived  at  their  ideas  and  conceptions  in  the  first  place. Liberation  from  this  unfathomable  confusion  came  only  with  a  technical  concept  of  information which,  since  Shannon's  "Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication",  avoids  any  reference  to ideas  or  meanings  and  thus  to  people. Information  systems  in  the  narrowest  sense  of  the  word  are,  it  is  true,  optimised  in  terms  of  the storage,  processing  and  transmission  of  messages.  Communication  systems  on  the  other  hand because  in  addition  to  messages  they  also  control  the  traffic  of  persons  and  goods  3  comprise  all kinds  of  media  (in  McLuhan's  analysis)  from  road  systems  to  language.4  There  is  nonetheless good  reason  to  analyse  communication  systems  in  the  same  way  as  information  systems. Ultimately,  communication  too  depends  on  control  signals,  the  more  so  the  more  complex  its working;  even  the  triad  of  "things  communicated"  -  information,  persons,  goods  -  can  be reformulated  in  terms  of  information  theory: Firstly,  messages  are  essentially  commands  to  which  persons  are  expected  to react  [this  definition  in  the  original  German  is  based  on  the  etymology  of  the German  word  "Nachrichten"  -  Tr.]. Secondly,  as  systems  theory  teaches,  persons  are  not  objects  but  addresses

which  "make  possible  the  assessment  of  further  communications".5 Thirdly,  as  ethnology  since  Mauss  and  Levi-Strauss  has  taught,  goods represent  data  in  an  order  of  exchange  between  said  persons. However  if  data  make  possible  the  operation  of  storage,  addresses  that  of  transmission  and commands  that  of  data  processing,  then  every  communication  system,  as  the  alliance  of  these three  operations,  is  an  information  system.  It  depends  solely  on  whether  the  three  operations  are implemented  in  physical  reality  to  what  extent  such  a  system  becomes  an  independent communication  technology.  In  other  words  the  history  of  these  technologies  comes  to  an  end when  machines  not  only  handle  the  transmission  of  addresses  and  data  storage,  but  are  also able,  via  mathematical  algorithms,  to  control  the  processing  of  commands.  It  is  thus  no coincidence  that  not  until  the  start  of  the  computer  age,  that  is,  when  all  operations  of communication  systems  had  been  mechanised,  was  Shannon  able  to  describe  a  formal  model of  information.  This  model  comprises,  as  we  know,  five  connected  stages  6: Firstly  there  is  an  information  source  which  selects  one  message  per  unit  of time  from  the  either  enumerable-discrete  or  innumerable-continuous  quantity  of possible  messages. Secondly  this  source  supplies  one  or  more  transmitters  which  process  the message  via  suitable  coding  into  a  technical  signal  (something  which  is  quite impossible  in  the  discrete  case  without  intermediate  data  storage). Thirdly  these  transmitters  feed  a  channel  which  safeguards  the  transmission  of the  signal  in  space  and/or  time  from  physical  noise  and/or  hostile  interference. Fourthly  these  channels  lead  to  one  or  more  receivers  which  reconstitute  the message  from  the  signal  by  subjecting  it  to  a  decoding  algorithm  inverse  to  that of  the  transmitter,  so  that  finally, Fifthly,  the  retranslated  message  arrives  at  the  address  of  an  information  drain.7 This  elegant  model,  however,  cannot  simply  be  applied  to  the  factual  history  of  communication technology,  not  least  because  it  lays  no  claim  whatever  to  historicity.  Instead  of  simply  accepting Shannon's  five  black  boxes,  as  has  become  customary  in  linguistics  and  the  humanities  too,  it seems  more  important  and  more  rewarding  to  trace  back  through  history  how  their  evolution must  have  proceeded  in  the  first  place.  Taking  Luhmann's  premise  that  communication technologies  provide  a  "first-rate  demarcation  of  epochs  magnetising  all  else"  8,  it  is  reasonable to  conclude  that  the  historical  transition  from  orality  to  the  written  word  equated  to  a  decoupling of  interaction  and  communication,  and  the  transition  from  writing  to  the  technical  media  indeed  to a  decoupling  of  communication  and  information.  What  we  have  here,  therefore,  is  a  process  of evolution  which  has  come  to  a  conclusion  only  in  the  theory  and  practice  of  an  information  which corresponds  to  the  exact  opposite  of  the  energetic  concept  of  entropy.9 This  evolutionary  process  gives  us  the  possibility  of  dividing  the  history  of  communication media  into  two  main  blocks.  The  first  block  deals  with  the  history  of  writing  and  itself  divides  into a  section  on  scripts  and  one  on  printing.  The  second  block  on  technical  media  will  take  us  from the  basic  invention  of  telegraphy  via  the  analog  media  to,  finally,  the  digital  medium  of  the computer.

A.  Writing
1.  Script The  history  of  the  literate  cultures,  whose  "medium"  customarily  also  divides  history  from prehistory  10,  is  determined  by  two  series  of  variables.  The  first  series  stands  in  relation  to  what philosophy  since  the  Stoics  has  recognised,  or  failed  to  recognise,  as  a  reference:  To  the  extent that  the  content  of  a  medium  is  always  another  medium  11  and  that  of  writing  (even  for  Aristotle 12)  is  speech,  scripts  can  be  classified  according  to  whether  they  process  everyday  languages into  pictographs  or  syllabic  or  phonemic  signs.13  However  to  the  extent  that  the  medium  of writing,  probably  for  the  first  time,  also  couples  storage  and  transmission,  inscription  and  post, then  physical  variables  relating  to  writing  implements  and  writing  surface  decide  as  to  the  space and  time  frame  of  the  communication.  These  variables  dictate  the  time  needed  for  transmitting and  receiving,  the  permanence  or  erasability  of  what  is  written  and,  not  least,  whether  the information  is  transportable  or  not. The  first  series  of  variables  controls  developments  between  speech  and  writing:  degrees  of memory  performance,  degrees  of  grammatical  analysability,  the  possibilities  of  coupling  speech with  other  media.  As  an  independent  field  of  anthropological  media  research  it  can,  for  our purposes,  be  left  to  one  side. The  second  series  of  variables  has  received  considerably  less  attention,  possibly  because  it  is so  material  in  nature.  And  yet  it  is  such  simple  things  as  writing  implements  and  writing  surfaces that  determine  the  gain  in  power  in  which  the  introduction  of  scripts  always  results.  If  priests were  interested  in  the  storage  of  addresses,  that  is,  of  gods  or  the  dead,  for  a  maximum  length  of time;  if  merchants  were  interested  in  the  storage  of  goods  over  a  maximum  length  of  time  and  in the  transportation  of  goods  over  maximum  distances  and  finally  warriors  in  the  transmission  of commands  over  maximum  distances  in  the  shortest  possible  time,  then  the  oldest  scripts  which were  produced  some  3000  years  BC  in  Sumeria  and  Egypt  had  economic  and  religious functions.  In  warrior  circles  however,  that  which  military  historians  call  the  oral  "stone  age  of  the command  flow"  ended  only  with  Napoleon.14  Apart  from  commands  passed  from  mouth  to  ear there  were  only  the  semiotic  use  of  fire  for  signaling  purposes  and  fast  but  equally  oral messengers,  whose  record  was  probably  held  by  Genghis  Khan.15 The  first  manifestations  of  script  are  of  course  inscriptions  without  a  writing  surface  in  the accepted  sense.  Two-dimensional  rolls  of  seals  or  stamps  in  the  medium  of  clay  enabled  goods to  be  given  addresses  indicating  their  owner  or  their  contents.  Stone  inscriptions  named  the deceased  occupants  of  tombs.16  As  signals  in  the  absence  of  the  source  of  information,  in  other words  through  the  decoupling  of  communication  and  interaction,  inscriptions  opened  up, according  to  Jan  Assmann,  the  possibility  in  principle  of  literature.17 By  contrast  an  administration  of  those  great  river  irrigation  systems  in  which  cities  and  high cultures  blossomed  presupposed  the  transition  from  inscribed  tablets  to  skillfully  crafted  and optimised  transportable  writing  surfaces:  bamboo  and  mulberry  in  China,  unfired  clay  or  clay fired  for  storage  purposes  in  Mesopotamia,  papyrus  as  the  monopoly  of  the  Nile  delta.  Thus  the same  rivers  on  which  the  traffic  of  slave  labour  and  goods  flowed  simultaneously  carried  (on  the basis  of  a  calendar  or  goniometric  mathematics)  the  commands  of  water  allocation  and  the harvesting  of  products.18  The  same  cities  that  translated  the  anthropological  schema  of  head, hand  and  torso  into  the  architectonic  schema  of  palaces,  streets  and  storehouses  19  needed

scripts  for  the  processing  transmission  and  storage  of  their  data.  This  establishment  of  a  unified area  is  reflected  in  the  texts  themselves  as  a  spatialisation  of  speech:  since  its  very  beginnings writing  has  yielded  lists  without  context  which  bear  no  traces  of  oral  or  written  communication networks,  but  for  this  precise  reason  no  longer  have  any  equivalent  in  everyday  situations.20 By  contrast,  outreachings  beyond  the  unified  area  -  the  founding  of  empires  in  other  words  - only  became  possible  when  states  in  both  the  ancient  world  and  the  modern  took  over  control  of the  warrior  messengers  and  additionally,  in  the  ancient  world  since  1200  BC,  after  the  crossing of  two  breeds  of  horse,  made  messengers  and  warriors  mobile.21  In  classical  times,  "There was,"  in  the  immortal  words  of  Herodotus,  "nothing  swifter  on  earth"  than  the  alliance  of  media which,  under  the  Achaemenides,  combined  Persia's  Royal  Way  with  a  mounted  staging messenger  service  to  carry  "urgent  messages  at  a  fast  trot,  in  the  face  of  all  natural  adversities, from  rider  to  rider,  from  stage  to  stage.22  Angareion,  the  Persian  name  of  this  military  mail,  is  the root  of  the  Greek  word  for  messenger  and  consequently  of  all  Christian  angels. The  Greek  polis  had  but  one  script  to  set  against  a  communications  empire  such  as  the Persian,  but  in  contrast  to  oriental  bureaucracies  it  was  entirely  susceptible  *of  orality.  Firstly  the Greek  alphabet  (from  Indo-European  necessities  and  because  it  developed  in  the  course  of commercial  and  translation  intercourse  with  semitic  consonant  scripts)  turned  redundant consonants  into  vowels,  thus  performing  the  first  total  analysis  of  a  spoken  language  -  and  in principle  of  all  such.23  The  fact  that  vowel  signs  for  the  first  time  encoded  prosodic-musical elements  of  speech  permitted  of  a  musical  notation,  and  in  the  Pythagorean  school  for  the simple  reason  that  Greek  letters  also  possessed  numerical  values  24,  a  mathematisation  of music,  to  the  extent  that  this  remained  a  matter  of  abstract  intervals. Secondly,  the  triumphal  progress  of  the  vocalic  alphabet  seems  less  to  be  the  result  of  an overestimated  degree  of  innovation  rather  than  of  the  unambiguity  of  its  phoneme  allocation. This  minimised  the  effort  required  for  literacy  and  thus  transferred  palace  and  temple  secrets  to the  public  domain.25  It  became  possible  for  literature  firstly  to  incorporate  oral  mnemonics  (such as  airs  or  rhapsodies)  and  later  also  prose.26  Athenian  tyrants  founded  the  first  public  library;  the bookworm  Euripides  became  the  "first  great  reader"  among  writers.27 These  ancient  scrolls  got  their  Biblical  name  from  a  papyrus-exporting  city  in  Phoenicia  whose place  was  taken  as  of  5O0  BC  by  the  Nile  delta.  The  Imperium  Romanum  too,  after  the  conquest of  Egypt,  based  its  command  network  -  which  is  what  the  empire  was  -  on  a  combination  of mounted  staging  messengers,  madeup  military  roads  and  easily  transportable  papyrus.  The empire,  in  other  words,  combined  despotic  transmission  mechanisms  with  a  democratic alphabet.  The  cursus  publicus  which  Augustus  set  up,  with  overnight  stations  at  distances  of  40 kilometres  and  staging  posts  at  around  12  kilometres,  exclusively  for  officials  and  legions  28 became,  despite  this,  or  perhaps  precisely  because  of  it,  the  crystallisation  point  for  European towns.  In  combination  with  beacon  telegraphy  at  sensitive  frontiers,  a  state  postal  service,  which was  faster  than  the  fastest  ships  and  was  not  excelled  until  Napoleon,  transmitted  imperial power  as  such:  "Caesarum  est  per  arbem  terrae  litteras  missitare"  29,  as  a  late  Roman  writer  has it  -  "It  is  the  office  of  emperors  to  send  written  commands  across  the  world."  In  comparison  with this  perfect  transmission  medium  for  said  world  and  Caesar's  news-sheet  distribution  in  the  city of  Rome,  data  storage  -  even  if  there  was  an  imperial  officium  sacrae  memoriae  since  Hadrian  - remained  technically  retarded. Papyrus  may  be  light,  but  it  is  fragile  and  impermanent.  It  could  only  be  stored  in  rolls  and  read

with  two  hands.  In  the  opinion  of  Alan  Turing,  the  first  computer  theorist,  "it  must  have  taken some  time  to  look  up  references  in  such  volumes".30  It  was  not  until  the  arrival  of  the  codex  in parchment,  used  first  by  the  library  of  Persimmon  for  circumventing  the  Egyptian  papyrus monopoly,  and  by  Christians  since  140  AD,  that  indexing  by  location,  sheets  and  finally  sides, became  possible.  Books,  which  were  durable,  erasable  (as  in  the  palimpsest)  and  addressable with  special  pages  (indices)  were  worth  their  extra  weight  and  extra  cost.  They  decoupled increasingly  cursory  reading  from  the  laboriousness  and  slowness  of  orality.  When  Bishop Ambrose  of  Milan  (according  to  the  testimony  of  his  best-known  disciple)  read  a  codex  "his  eyes swept  over  the  pages  extracting  the  essence  of  the  meaning  while  he  himself  remained  silent".31 In  the  codex,  the  transportable,  addressable  and  interpretable  scripts  of  former  nomads,  the Jews  and  Arabs,  vanquished  the  immobility  of  statues  and  temples  of  the  gods. The  decline  of  the  cursus  publicus  and  the  Islamic  incorporation  of  Egypt,  which  also  led  to  the destruction  of  the  great  ancient  library,  cut  off  Western  Europe  from  papyrus  imports.  What  was left  was  the  agricultural  product,  parchment,  on  which  monks  were  constrained  to  copy  the censored  Christian  version  of  what  was  contained  on  papyrus,  while  in  the  Byzantine  Empire  the flaw  of  written  commands  from  all  past  emperors  coagulated  into  the  legislation  of  the  Codex. Through  such  bridgings  or  compressions  of  time  a  translatio  studii  was  enabled  to  take  place; but  the  translatio  imperii  presupposed  new  orders  of  distance  and  thus  more  accessible  writing surfaces. In  the  13th  century,  paper,  imported  from  China  via  Baghdad,  arrived  in  Europe,  where  it  was further  developed  by  cities  of  the  linen  trade  and  the  new  windmills  and  watermills  into  rag- paper.  This  writing  surface  was  central  to  the  rise  of  the  universities  which,  with  their incorporated  book-copying  departments  and  postal  networks  broke  the  storage  monopoly  of  the monasteries.  And  at  the  same  time  it  was  central,  in  combination  with  the  Indian  numerical system  imported  via  Arabia,  to  the  rise  of  trading  cities.32  The  important  thing  in  this  context  was not  simply  the  well  known  invention  of  double-entry  bookkeeping  but,  above  all,  a  mathematical notation  which  for  the  first  time  brought  independence  from  the  numerous  workaday  languages. Greeks,  when  adding  two  numbers  together,  had  said  kai,  and  Romans  et;  since  the  15th century  however  we  have  had  plus  and  minus,  as  mute  as  they  are  international,  as  signs  for mathematical  operators. 2.  Printing Gutenberg's  invention  of  printing  using  movable  letters  developed  from  book-spine  stamps which,  in  contrast  to  their  predecessors  in  China  and  Korea,  functioned  both  alphabetically  and (after  the  disappearance  of  ligatures)  discretely,  may  not  have  been  a  revolution  of  the magnitude  of  the  codex  -  but  it  met  the  demand  awakened  by  paper.  As  "the  first  assembly  line in  the  history  of  technology"  33,  printing  potentiated  the  data  processing  capacity  of  books. Because  all  copies  of  an  edition,  in  contrast  to  manual  copies,  had  the  same  texts,  woodcuts  and engravings  in  the  same  places,  they  could  be  accessed  via  unified  and  for  the  first  time alphabetical  indexes.  This  addressing  using  page  numbers,  titles  and,  since  Leibniz, alphabetical  library  catalogues  34,  put  the  communication  system  which  is  science  on  its reference  basis,  while  book  illustrations  free  of  copying  errors  formed  the  basis  of  engineering.35 Not  without  reason  could  Vasari  boast  that  Italy  had  discovered  perspective,  as  enabling  the production  of  technically  accurate  drawings,  in  the  same  year  as  Gutenberg  invented typography.

New  media  do  not  make  old  media  obsolete;  they  assign  them  other  places  in  the  system.  Thus because  printing  now  reproduced  the  rhetorical-musical  performances  at  tournaments  as literature  and  fictions  of  the  authors,  the  physical  techniques  of  these  tournaments  appear (according  to  Gumbrecht's  thesis)  to  have  been  transmuted  into  silent,  measurable  disciplines.36 Equally,  it  was  only  as  a  development  within  typography  that  the  intrinsic  value  of  handwriting emerged,  the  individuality  of  the  hand  taking  the  place  of  seals  on  letters  and  documents  and which  became  the  domain  of  a  state  system  of  post  and  police.  The  first  state  postal  systems  of early  modernity  were,  after  the  fashion  of  the  Roman  imperial  system,  still  reserved  for  military and  diplomatic  networks  and  protected  from  interception  by  a  cryptography  whose  rise  began with  Vieta's  algebraic  encoding  of  alphabetical  and  numerical  signs.37  On  the  other  hand,  the territorial  states,  controlled  extensively  by  post  and  firearms,  opened  up  their  networks  to  a private  traffic  which  they  also  monopolised  through  their  sovereign  right  of  posts.  When commercial  correspondents  were  included  in  the  public  postal  network  after  1600,  newspapers and  journals  came  into  being;  when  the  transport  of  persons  was  also  included  after  1650,  the post-coach  networks  were  established  as  a  scheduled  service.38  However  the  oft-quoted structural  transformation  from  the  aristocratic  to  the  middle-class  publicness,  whose  travels  and letters,  printed  pamphlets  and  newspaper  critiques  are  supposed  to  have  undermined  the  old power  system  of  Europe,  never  took  place.39  Even  without  its  consistent  control  through  secret cabinets  and  print  censorship  the  middle-class  publicness  remained  an  artefact  of  mercantile states,  whose  new  post  office  provided  half  the  budget  and  half  the  war  chest.40  Only  in  the intimacy  of  family  circles  did  the  "addiction  to  reading"  of  the  so-called  public  41  promote  a record  rise  in  national-language  belles-lettres  which  compensated  for  the  "loss  of  sensuality"  42 with  virtual  effects  on  readers'  senses,  thus  presaging  future  media  technologies.43 This  mediatisation  of  the  printed  word  presumably  had  its  basis  in  a  routine  light  reading  which was  no  longer  a  privilege  of  the  elite,  as  in  Saint  Ambrose's  time,  but  which  paved  the  way  for democracy  through  compulsory  schooling  and  general  literacy.  But  precisely  this  effortless reading  triggered  a  new  systemic  problem.  Because,  unlike  parchment  codices,  printed  books are  storage  devices  having  no  possibility  of  erasure,  there  was,  around  1800,  (to  quote  Fichte) "no  branch  of  knowledge  on  which  a  surfeit  of  books  is  not  available".44  As  a  result  literature  and science  had  to  revamp  their  transmission  and  receiving  techniques:  away  from  the  literalness  of quotes  from  the  scholarly  elite,  and  rhetorical  mnemonics,  towards  an  interpretative  approach which  reduced  the  quantity  of  printed  data  to  its  essence,  in  other  words  to  a  smaller  quantity  of data.  The  consequence  for  the  communication  system  that  is  science,  since  Humboldt's  reform, was  lectures  without  textbooks,  seminars  as  exercises  in  interpretation  and  the  rise  at universities  of  a  philosophy  whose  absolute  "spirit"  preserved  only  the  "remembrance"  of  all previous  forms  of  knowledge  and  of  its  own  textbook,  thus  becoming  the  hermeneutic "silhouette"  of  the  totality  of  books.45 In  the  real  world  this  mediatisation  of  writing  amounted  to  its  industrial  revolution.  In  place  of Gutenberg's  enumerable  combinations  came,  in  practical  terms  too,  a  calculus  of  infinites: endless  paper  machines  replaced,  as  of  1800,  the  discrete  formats  and  moulded  sheets;  pulp papers  from  America's  seemingly  inexhaustible  forests,  this  material  basis  of  all  mass  print material  since  1850,  took  the  place  of  rag.  And  finally  the  typewriter  and  have,  since  1880, levelled  out  the  difference  between  writing  and  printing  46,  thus  opening  up  the  floodgates  of modern  literature.47  It  was  Mallarme  who  first  offered  the  solution  of  reducing  literature  to  its lexical  meaning,  the  twenty-six  letters,  and  thus  not  competing  with  other  media  at  all.

B.  Technical  Media
Unlike  writing,  technical  media  do  not  utilise  the  code  of  a  workaday  language.  They  make  use of  physical  processes  which  are  faster  than  human  perception  and  are  only  at  all  susceptible  of formulation  in  the  code  of  modern  mathematics. 1.  Telegraphy  and  Analog  Technology Self-evidently  there  must  always  have  been  technical  media,  because  any  sending  of  signals using  acoustic  or  visual  means  is  in  itself  technical.  However  in  preindustrial  times  channels such  as  smoke  signals  or  fire  telegraphy  which  exploited  the  speed  of  light,  or  bush  telegraphs and  calling  chains  making  use  of  the  speed  of  sound  were  only  subsystems  of  an  everyday language.  The  beacon  signal  from  Troy  to  Mycenae  with  which  Aeschylus  introduces  the  literary genre  of  tragedy  announced  in  one  single  bit  the  fall  of  the  besieged  fortress  although  that depended  on  prior  arrangement.48  On  the  other  hand  it  remains  questionable  whether  a  form  of telegraphy  which  according  to  Polybios  was  capable  of  encoding  the  Greek  alphabet  into  five times  five  light  signals  and  thus  transmitting  random  sets  ever  saw  service.49 Information  rates  which  exceeded  all  performance  limits  of  writing  were  first  achieved  as  a result  of  the  necessity  for  command  flow  in  conscripted  mass  armies  and  wars  waged  with standardised  weaponry.  It  was  one  and  the  same  to  Lakanai,  the  politician  who  presented  the revolutionary  France  of  1793  with  an  elementary  school  system  and  a  literary  copyright  law  who one  year  later  persuaded  the  national  assembly  to  build  optical  telegraphy  lines.  As  the  official reason  for  this  revolution  the  argument  was  pressed  into  service  that,  in  large  nation-states,  only Chappe's  optical  telegraph  could  make  possible  that  democratic  election  process  which Rousseau  had,  as  we  know,  picked  up  from  the  city-state  of  Geneva.  With  Napoleon  however,  a less  public  but  exclusive  use  of  the  optical  telegraph  network  gave  rise  to  a  strategy  which  finalIy released  wars  from  the  stone  age  of  command  flow.  Independently-operating  divisions  were able  to  fight  on  several  fronts  at  the  same  time  because  newly-created  general  staffs  imposed their  cartographic  knowledge  by  telegraph  on  the  actual  ground.50 Telegraphy  thus  separated  literary  publicness  and  military  secrecy  at  the  same  historic moment,  since  publicness  was  transferred  from  elites  to  entire  populations.  A  new  elite  of engineering  schools  and  general  staffs  finally  discovered  in  the  1809  war  their  new,  to  all  intents and  purposes,  secret  medium  of  electricity.  With  the  move  of  telegraphy  from  optics  to  direct current,  not  only  did  the  human  and  therefore  unreliable,  relay  stations  disappear,  but  also Claude  Chappe's  grand  total  of  98  signs.  The  Morse  code  with  its  dots  and  dashes  and  pauses put  an  economy  of  signs  into  practice  which  Leibniz  had  previously  come  up  with  in  expressly typographical  theory  in  the  form  of  his  binary  code.51  The  electric  telegraph,  optimised  on  the basis  of  letter  frequency  and  charged  by  the  number  of  words,  was  the  first  step  on  the  road  to information  technology. In  terms  of  organisation  and  technology  too,  telegraphy  had  world-wide  repercussions.  For absolutely  the  first  time,  information  was  decoupled,  in  the  form  of  a  massless  flow  of electromagnetic  waves,  from  communication.  Remote  telegraphic  control  via  landline  made possible  a  systematic  railway  network.52  Railways  made  possible  an  accelerated  traffic  in  goods and  persons  53  which,  from  the  time  of  the  American  Civil  War  onward,  was  also  subject,  for military  purposes,  to  telegraphic  command.54  However,  in  the  form  of  goods  and  people  traffic, the  post  lost  two  of  its  traditional  functions.  It  was  forced  to  become  a  pure  information

technology  based  on  the  principles  of  house  numbers  and  letterboxes,  prepayment  with  stamps and  the  world  postal  union.55 This  detachment  from  the  ground  whose  distances  (as  in  synchronous  mathematical topography)  are,  in  contrast  to  all  pre-modern  postal  systems,  no  longer  calculated  because  only absolute  speed  counts,  brought  internationality:  from  the  stock  exchange  reports  of  world  trade and  the  telegraph  agencies  of  the  world  press,  to  colonial  empires  which,  like  the  British  Empire, were  founded  on  a  "fleet  in  being"  and  consequently  on  a  global  undersea  cable  monopoly.56 Technical  repercussions  of  telegraphy  as  information  time  made  discrete,  were  consequential inventions  which  paradoxically  also  processed  precisely  the  continuous  signal  sources.  Of  these I  shall  pass  over  the  analog  medium  of  photography  which  requires  a  treatment  of  its  own  and mention  only  the  telephone,  gramophone  record  and  film. Bell's  telephone,  the  most  lucrative  single  patent  of  all  time,  came  about  in  1876  not  by  any means  in  its  familiar  function,  but  in  the  course  of  an  attempt  to  transmit  several  messages  over  a single  telegraph  cable  at  the  same  time.  In  exactly  the  same  way  only  a  year  later  Edison's phonograph  emerged  as  a  spin-off  from  an  attempt  to  increase  the  throughput  rate  of  telegraph cables.  And  finally  Muybridge's  scientific  serial  photographs  which,  in  1895,  after  the  invention  of Maltese  cross  and  celluloid  paved  the  way  for  cinema,  were  triggered  by  electric  telegraph relays. Film  and  gramophone,  these  mass-reproducible  competitors  to  Edison's  phonographs,  made  it possible  to  store  optical  and  acoustical  data  as  such.  Because  analog  media  underbid,  first mechanically  and  subsequently  electrically,  the  perceptual  thresholds  determined  by  Fechner, they  can  recognise  in  speech  phonemes  and  musical  intervals  -  which  is  where  the  Greek analysis  as  their  being  the  final  alphabetical  elements  stopped  -  complex  frequency  mixtures which  are  open  to  a  further,  and  since  Fourier,  mathematical,  analysis.  The  modern  fundamental concept  of  frequency  57,  which  since  Euler  governs  probability  calculation,  music  and  optics alike,  has  replaced  the  arts  with  technical  media.  This  physics  in  the  simulation  process  of  the real  is  no  longer  partnered  in  the  reception  process  by  a  language-based  mnemonics  or pedagogy,  but  by  a  sensory  physiology  which  has  guaranteed  the  media  their  world-wide  and, thanks  to  Shannon's  measure  of  information,  calculable  success.58  At  the  same,  time  a knowledge  gap  between  unconscious  media  effects  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  innovatory  thrusts on  the  other,  (which  since  Edison's  first  laboratory  are  also  plannable)  has  emerged  which, despite  the  participation  of  women  in  telegraph,  telephone  and  typewriter  operations  59  is inimical  to  the  general  development  of  literacy  and  absolutely  rules  out  communication  on communication. A  prominent  role  in  this  turning-point,  whose  significance  is  probably  equalled  only  by  the invention  of  writing  60,  was  taken  by  Maxwell's  electromagnetic  field  equations  and  their experimental  substantiation  by  Heinrich  Hertz.  Since  Christmas  1906,  when  Fessenden's  radio transmitter  broadcast  low-frequency  random  events  as  they  occur  as  amplitude  or  frequency modulation  of  a  high  frequency,  there  exist  non-material  channels.  Since  1906,  when  de  Forest developed,  from  Edison's  light  bulb,  the  controllable  valve,  information  is  open  to  any  kind  of amplification  and  manipulation.  The  valve  radio,  developed  as  wireless  telephony  for  breaking the  imperial  cable  monopoly,  first  of  all  made  the  new  weapons  systems  of  the  first  World  War, the  aeroplane  and  the  tank,  both  mobile  and  dirigible  by  remote  control  61,  and  after  the  end  of the  war,  was  applied  to  the  civilian  populations.62

In  the  guise  of  a  "secondary  orality"  63,  bypassing  the  written  word,  radio  had  the  effect  of standardising  unwritten  languages,  primarily  through  world-wide  short-wave  broadcasting 64,thus  transforming  colonised  tribal  associations  into  independent  nations.65  In  the  same  way the  telephone,  in  its  progress  from  the  direct  dialling  system  via  frequency  multiplex  to  satellite links,  has  made  possible  the  non-hierarchical  networking  firstly  of  cities  and  ultimately  of  the "global  village".66  Yet  the  publicly  accessible  wavebands  remain,  despite  their  critical overcrowding  67,  only  fractions  of  a  frequency  spectrum  which,  from  long-wave  broadcasting  to the  decimetre  radar,  exercises  governmental  or  military  control  functions  and  taps  all  public wavebands  for  the  secret  services.68 The  electrification  of  sensory  input  data  through  transducers  and  sensors  enabled  the entertainments  industry  to  couple  analog  storage  media  firstly  with  one  another  and  secondly with  transmission  media.  The  sound  film  combined  optical  and  acoustic  memories;  radio,  before the  introduction  of  the  tape-recorder,  largely  transmitted  gramophone  records;  the  first  television systems,  prior  to  the  development  of  electronic  cameras,  scanned  feature  films.  Thus  the  content of  entertainment  media  always  remains  another  medium  which,  in  this  way,  they  serve  to promote. But  all  these  couplings  of  technologies  which  are  already  individually  standardised,  even though  they  gave  birth  to  aesthetic  forms  from  the  radio  play  and  electronic  music  to  the videoclip,  have  one  decisive  deficiency:  there  is  no  general  standard  which  regulates  their control  and  reciprocal  translation.  This  is  precisely  the  point  at  which  the  heroes  and  heroines  of Benjamin's  theory  of  media  came  to  the  rescue  in  the  form  of  editors  in  film  studios  and  sound engineers  for  tape  with  their  celebrated  but  strictly  manual  montage  techniques.69  The  rendering obsolete  of  this  human  intervention  and  the  automation  of  a  general  standard  was  reserved  for digital  technology. 2.  Digital  Technology Digital  technology  functions  like  an  alphabet  but  on  a  numerical  basis.  It  replaces  the continuous  functions  into  which  the  analog  media  transform  input  data,  which  are  generally  also continuous,  with  discrete  scannings  at  points  in  time  as  equidistant  as  possible,  in  the  same  way that  the  24  film  exposures  per  second,  or  at  a  much  higher  frequency  since  the  Nipkow  screen television  did  before.  This  measurement,  followed  by  evaluation  in  the  binary  number  system,  is the  precondition  for  a  general  media  standard. According  to  the  scanning  theorem  of  Nyquist  and  Shannon,  any  and  every  form  of  signal, provided  it  is  frequency-range-limited  intrinsically  or  through  filtering,  can  be  bi-univocally reconstructed  from  scanned  values  of  at  least  twice  the  frequency.70  The  quantisation  noise which  necessarily  arises  in  the  process  can  also,  in  contrast  to  the  physically-determined  noise of  analog  systems,  be  minimised  to  any  degree  simply  because  it  obeys  the  laws  of  a  digital system.71 It  was  in  1936  that  Turing's  universal  discrete  machine  stated  the  principle  of  all  digital technology.  Extrapolating  or  reducing  the  equally  discrete  typewriter  72,  it  consisted  simply  of  an endless  paper  tape,  the  idea  of  which  goes  back  to  1800.  On  this  "paper  machine"  for  data storage,  a  write/read/erase  head  for  data  processing  could  write  the  binary  signs  0  and  1  while  a transport  device  for  data  addressing  made  it  possible  to  access  the  neighbouring  signs  right  and left.  Turing  proved  however  that  this  elementary  machine,  because  by  contrast  to  the  noisy

Laplace  universe  it  knows  a  finite  number  of  states,  is  equal  not  only  to  any  mathematician  but solves  all  (in  Hilbert's  sense)  decidable  problems  of  mathematics  through  simulation  of  any  other correctly-programmed  machine.73 Thus  the  Turing  machine  concluded  in  its  universality  all  developments  for  the  storing,  indexing and  processing  of  both  alphabetical  and  numerical  data.  In  the  alphabetical  field  these developments  had  led  from  lists  and  catalogues,  via  the  card  indexes  from  which  around  1800 Jean  Paul's  literature  and  Hegel's  philosophy  had  sprung  74,  to  the  Hollerith  machine  of  the American  census  of  1890.75  In  the  numeric  field  a  parallel  development  had  led  from  Schickart's calculator  for  the  four  basic  types  of  calculation,  via  Jacquard's  programmable  looms  76,  to  the pioneer  of  computers,  Babbage,  whose  differential  engine  of  1822  reduced  the  time-consuming developments  of  series  in  trigonometry  and  ballistics  to  recurrent  difference  equations  while  his later  planned  analytical  engine  was  intended  to  make  the  whole  of  analysis  calculable  with conditional  jump  commands.77  To  achieve  the  alphanumeric  universality  of  Turing  machines, alias  computers,  however,  the  two  development  strands  had  to  be  brought  together  by  Boole's logical  algebra  and  Goedel's  theorem  of  incompleteness,  making  statements  and  axioms  as manipulable  as  figures. The  Turing  machine  of  1936  was  infinitely  slow,  its  paper  tape  infinitely  long  and  therefore inexistent.  By  contrast  the  computer,  its  technical  successor,  is  a  miracle  of  economy  of  time  and space  called  forth  by  the  exigencies  of  the  second  World  War.  At  the  same  time  that  Shannon was  demonstrating  that  simple  relays  connected  in  series  or  in  parallel  can  automate  all operations  of  Boole's  algebra  78,  Zuse  was  building  the  first  computers  for  Luftwaffe  research from  telegraph  relays  while  the  cryptography  department  of  the  Wehrmacht  rejected  his  offers  of automation.79  At  the  end  of  1943,  by  contrast,  the  British  secret  service  came  up  with  computers based  on  overmodulated  tubes  for  Turing's  war-deciding  cryptoanalysis  of  precisely  that  secret VHF  radio  traffic  which  had  made  the  German  blitzkrieg  possible.80  Finally,  in  1945,  John  von Neumann  designed  the  now  customary  architecture  of  sequential  but  microsecond-fast computers  for  the  planned  American  uranium  bomb  whose  rate  of  explosion  set  new  standards in  the  measurement  of  time.81 Von  Neumann's  design  postulated  the  following  three  system  elements: Firstly  a  central  processing  unit  for  command-controlled  processing  of alphanumeric  data  by  either  mathematical  or  logical  rules; Secondly  a  write-read  memory  for  variable  data  and  a  read-only  memory  for programmed  commands; Thirdly  a  bus  system  for  sequential  transmission  of  all  these  data  and commands  as  bi-univocally  indicated  through  binary  addresses  by  pages  and columns. With  these  three  parts,  von  Neumann  machines  articulated  the  fundamental  structure  of information  technology  as  a  functional  interrelationship  of  hardware  elements.  No  matter whether  their  environment  supplies  alphabetic  or  numerical  data,  that  is,  writing  or  media- generated  values,  the  commands,  data  and  addresses  are  all  represented  internally  by  binary numbers.  The  classic  distinction  between  functions  and  arguments,  operators  and  numerical values  has  become  permeable.  However  it  is  precisely  this  breakdown  of  the  alphabet  which

also  permits  operations  to  be  applied  to  operations,  and  ramifications  to  be  automated.  Which  is why  computers  in  principle  comprehend  all  other  media  and  can  subject  their  data  to  the mathematical  procedures  of  signal  processing.82 Data  throughput  and  access  time  depend  solely  on  physical  parameters.  Since  1948,  when the  transistor  replaced  the  tubes/printed  circuits  of  the  second  World  War,  and  1968  when integrated  circuits  replaced  the  single  transistor,  in  each  case  reducing  the  space  and  time requirement  by  a  factor  of  ten,  real  time  analyses  and  real  time  syntheses  of  one-dimensional data  flows  (of  speech  or  music  for  example)  are  no  longer  any  problem.83  So  the  sound  engineer can  go  home.  However,  for  multi-dimensional  signal  processing  in  real  time,  such  as  is  required for  television  pictures  or  computer  animations,  the  von  Neumann  architecture  becomes  a bottleneck.  For  this  reason  large  numbers  of  parallel  computers  are  already  in  use,  and biological  and  optical  circuitry  such  as  is  required  above  all  for  the  simulation  of  brain  functions, is  already  under  development.  The  day  is  not  far  off  when  signal  processing  will  reach  the physical  limits  of  feasibility.84 This  absolute  limit  is  where  the  history  of  communication  technologies  will  literally  come  to  an end.  Theoretically  there  remains  only  the  question  as  to  what  logic  this  completion  will  have obeyed.  From  Freud  85  to  McLuhan  the  classic  answer  to  this  was  a  generic  subject  -  humanity which  before  of  an  indifferent  or  interferent  natural  world  would  have  externalised  first  its  motor and  sensory  interface,  and  finally  its  intelligence,  in  technical  prosthetics.  However  if  Shannon's mathematisation  of  information  rested  on  his  "fundamental  idea"  of  inferring,  through  a conceptual  transfer,  the  "information  efficiency  of  a  jammed  transmission"  from  its cryptoanalytical  efficiency  86,  interference  will  only  be  understandable  as  the  interventions  of  a hostile  intelligence,  and  the  history  of  communication  technologies  as  a  series  of  strategic escalations.  Without  reference  to  the  individual  or  to  mankind,  communication  technologies  will have  overhauled  each  other  until  finally  an  artificial  intelligence  proceeds  to  the  interception  of possible  intelligences  in  space.87 Notes 1.  Praun  1970  137   2.  Peters  1  9B9   3.  Knies  1857,  6   4.  McLuhan  I  968   5.  Luhmann  1988,  901   6.  vgl.  Hagemeyer  1979,422-39   7.  Shannon  1949a,  10f   8.  Luhmann  1985,  21   9.  Bell  1955,  35   10.  Schiller  1904,  Xlll  17   11.  McLuhan  1968   12.  Aristoteles,  Herm.  1  6a  3-7   13.  Derrida  1974   14.  Van  Creveld  1985   15.  Voigt  1965-73,  11/2  830f   16.  Schenkel  1983,  53-59   17.  Assmann  1983,  80-88   18.  Witfagel  1962  

19.  Leroi-Gourhon  1980,  228   20.  Gaady  1977,  86f   21.  Innis  1950,  71   22.  Herodot,  Hist.  Vlll  98   23.  Lohmann  1980,  168-74   24.  Dornseiff  1922,13   25.  Vernant  1962,  1-3   26.  Havelack  1962,  32   27.  Nietzsche  1922  28,  V  218   28.  Sueton,  Augustus,  49   29.  Fronio,  zit.  Riepl  1913,  241   30.  Turing  1987,  187   31.  Augushn,  Conf.  Vl  3   32.  Innis  1950,  126-140   33.  Ong  1987,  1  19   34.  Vorstius/Joost  1977,  30-46   35.  Eisenstein  1979,  153   36.  Gumbrecht  1988,  42f   37.  Kahn  1967   38.  Beyrer  1985,  54   39.  Habermas  1971,  28-61   40.  Voigt  1965-73,  II/  848   41.  Schenda  1970   42.  Schon  1987   43.  Kittler  1987   44.  Fichte  1845,  Vlll  98   45.  Hegel  1952,  564  and  27   46.  McLuhan  1968,  283   47.  Kenner  1987   48.  Aischylos,  Agamemnon,  V  281-316   49.  Riepl  1913,  91-106   50.  Oberliesen  1982,  44-62   51.  Cajori,  1928-29,  11  182-85   52.  Schivelbusch  1977,  32-34   53.  Knies  1857,  16  19   54.  Blum  1939,  73   55.  vgl.  Derrida,  1982   56.  Kennedy,  1979,  75-97   57.  Hacking  1975   58.  Beck  1974,  37f   59.  Faulstich-Wieland/Horstkemper,  1987   60.  Leroi-Gourhan,  1980,  265-70   61.  Virillo  1986   62.  Lerg  1970   63.  Ong  1987,  136   64.  Schwipps  1971,  29   65.  Innis  1950,  169   66.  McLuhan  1968   67.  Beck  1974,  38-42   68.  Bamford  1986   69.  Benjamin  1972-B5,  1/2  495f  

70.  Shannon  1949a,  11  f   71.  von  Neumann  1967,  146f   72.  Hodges  19B3,  96   73.  Turing  1987,  17-60  and  157f   74.  Rosenkranz  1844,  15   75.  Oberliesen  182,  212-48   76.  Coy  1985,  43-48   77.  Hyman  1986,  191-279   78.  Shannan  1938,  713-23   79.  Zuse  1984,  51  f   80.  Hadges  1983,  267-88   81.  Hagen  1989   82.  Rabiner/Gold  1975   83.  Sickert  1983,  1  17  220   84.  Cambers  1985   85.  Freud  1940  68,  XIV  449f   86.  Hagemeyer  1979,  434   87.  Posner  1984,  198-202 Words  Cited Assmann,  Jan,  Schrift  Tod  und  Identitaet.  Das  Grab  als  Vorschule  der  Literatur  im  alten  Agypten. In:  Assmann,  Aleida  und  Jan/Hardmeier,  Christof  (Hrsg.)  Schrift  und  Gedaechtnis.  Beitraege  zur Archaeologie  der  literarischen  Kommunikation  1.  Muenchen  1983  64-93 Bamford,  James  NSA.  Amerikas  geheimster  Nachrichtendienst  Zurich/Wiesbaden  1986 Beck  Arnod  H.  Worte  und  Welen.  Geschichte  und  Technik  der  Nachrichtenubermiitung Frankfurt/M  1974 Bell,  D.A.  Information  theory  and  its  engineering  applications  3  Aufl.  New  York/Toronto/London 1955 Benjamin,  Walter  Das  Kunswerk  im  Zeitalter  seiner  technischen  Reproduzierbarkeit  Zweite Fassung  In:  Gesammelte  Schriften  hrsg.  v.  Tiedemann  Rolf/Schwepphaeuser  Hermann. Frankfurt/M.  1972-85  Bd  1  2  471-508 Beyrer,  Klaus,  Die  Postkutschenreise.  Tuebingen  1985.  (Untersuchungen  des  Ludwig-Uhland- lnstituts  der  Universitaet  Tuebingen  im  Auhrag  der  Tubinger  Vereinigung  fur  Volkskunde  hrsg.  v Hermann  Bausinbert  Bd  66) Blake,  George  G.,  History  of  radio  telegraphy  and  telephony.  London  1928. Blum,  Prof.  Dr.  Ing.  e.h.,  Das  neuzeitliche  Verkehrswesen  im  Dienste  der  Kriegsfuhrung.  In: Jahrbuch  fur  Wehrpolitik  und  Wehrwissenschahen  1939  73  92. Cajori,  Florian,  A  History  of  mathematica  notations.  I.  Chicago  1928  II.  Chicago  1929. Chambers,  William  G.,  Basics  of  communication  and  coding  Oxford  1985 Coy,  Wolfgong,  Industrieroboter.  Zur  Archaologie  der  zweiten  Schopfung.  Berlin  1985

Derrida,  Jacques,  Die  Postkarte  von  Sokrates  bis  an  Freud  und  jenseits.  l.  Berlin  1982. Dornseiff,  Franz,  Das  Alphabet  in  Mystik  und  Magie.  1  Auf  Leipzig  1922 Eisenstein,  Elizabeth,  The  printing  press  as  an  agent  of  change.  Communications  and  cultural transformations  in  early-modern  Europe  2  Bde.  New  York  1979. Foulstich-Wieland,  Hannelore/Horstkemper,  Marianne,  Der  Weg  zur  modernen Buerokommunikation.  Historische  Aspekte  des  Verhaltnisses  von  Frauen  und  neuen Technologien  BieleFeld  1987.(Materialien  zur  Frauenforschung  Bd.4) Fichte,  Johann  Gotlieb,  Deducierter  Plan  einer  zu  Berlin  zu  errichtenden  hoheren  Lehranstalt. (1817)  In:  Samtliche  Werke  hrsg.  v.  Immanuel  Hermann  Fichte.  Berlin  t845  Bd  Vlll  97-203 Freud,  Siegmund,  Das  Unbehagen  in  der  Kultur.  In:Gesammelte  Werke  chronologisch  geordnet. London/Frankfurt/M.  194068  Bd.XIV  419-506. Goody,  Jack,  The  domestication  of  the  savage  mind.  Cambridge  1977 Gumbrecht,  Hans  Ulrich,  Beginn  von  'Literatur'/Abschied  vom  Korper?  In:  Smolka-Koerdt Giesela/Spangenberg,  Peter  M  /Tillmann-  Barylla,  Dagmar  (Hrsg  ),  Der  Ursprung  von  Literatur Medien  Rollen  und  Kommunikationssituationen  zwischen  1450  und  1650.  Muenchen1988  15- 50. Habermas,  Juergen,  Strukturwandel  der  Oeffentlichkeit.  Untersuchungen  zu  einer  Kategorie  der burgerlichen  Gesellschaft  5.  Aufl.  Neuwied/Berlin  1971 Hacking,  lan,  The  emergence  of  probobiliy.  A  philosophica  study  of  eary  ideas  about  probability induction  and  statistical  inference  Cambridge/London/New  York/New Rochelle/Melbourne/Sidney  1975 Hagemeyer,  Friedrich-Wilhelm,  Die  Entstehung  van  Informationskonzepten  in  der Nachrichtentechnik.  Eine  Fallstudie  zur  Theoriebildung  in  der  Technik  in  Industrie-  und Kriegsforschung.  Diss.  (mosch.)  FU  Berlin  1979. Hagen,  Wolfgang,  Die  verlorene  Schrift.  Ueber  digitales  Schreiben  an  Computern.  Erscheint  in: Kittler,  Friedrich  A  /Tholen,  Georg  Christoph  (Hrsg.  Arsenale  der  Seele.  Literatur  und Medienanalyse  seit  1870  Muenchen1989. Havelock,  Eric  A.,  The  literate  revoluton  in  Greece  and  its  cultural  consequences.  Princeton 1982.  Hegel,  Georg  Wilhelm  Friedrich,  Phonomenologie  des  Geistes  (1807)  hrsg.  v.  Johannes Hofmeister  6  Aufl.  Hamburg  1952. Hodges,  Andrew,  Allan  Turing.  The  enigma.  New  York  1983. Holmberg,  Erik  J.,  ZurGeschichtedescursuspubicus  Diss.  Uppsala  1933 Hyman,  Anthony,  Charles  Babbage,  1791-1871  Philosoph  Mathematiker  Computerpionier Stuttgart  1987. Innis,  Harold  Adams,  Empire  and  Communications  Oxford  1950. Kahn,  David,  The  codebrakers.  The  story  of  secret  writing.  London  1967.

Kennedy,  Paul  M.,  Imperial  Cable  Communications  and  Strategy  1870  1914.  In:  Kennedy,  Paul M.  (Hrsg.)  The  war  plans  of  the  great  powers  1880-1914.  London  1979  75-79. Kenner,  Hugh,  The  mechanic  muse  NewYork/Oxford  1987 Kittler,  Friedrich  A.,  Grammophon  Film  Typewriter.  Berlin  1986 Kittler,  Friedrich  A.,  Aufschreibesysteme  1800/1900  2  Aufl  Muenchen1987 Knies,  Korl,  Der  Telegraph  as  Verkehrsmitel.  Tubingen  1857. Lerg,  Winfried  B.,  Die  Entstehung  des  Rundfunks  in  Deutschland.  Herkunft  und  Entwicklung eines  publizistischen  Mittels.  2  Auf  Frankfurt/M.  1970  (Beitraege  zur  Geschichte  des  deutschen Rundfunks  Bd.1) Lerai-Gourhan,  Andre,  Hand  und  Wort.  Die  Evolution  von  Technik,  Sprache  und  Kunst. Frankfurt/M  1980. Lohmann,  Johannes,  Die  Geburt  der  Tragoedie  aus  dem  Geiste  der  Musik  In:  Archiv  fur Musikwissenschaft  37  1980  167-  186. Luhmann,  Niklas,  Das  Problem  der  Epochenbildung  und  die  Evolutionstheorie.  In:  Gumbrecht, Hans  Ulrich/Link-Heer,  Ursula  (Hrsg.)  Epochenschwellen  und  Epochenstrukturen  im  Diskurs  der Literatur-  und  Sprachhistorie.  Fronkfurt/M.  1985  11-33. Luhmann,  Niklas,  Wie  ist  Bewusstsein  an  Kommunikation  beteiligt?  In:  Gumbrecht,  Hans Ulrich/Pfeiher,  K.  Ludwig  (Hrsg)  Materialitaet  der  Kommunikation.  Fronkfurt/M.1988  884-905. McLuhan,  Marshall,  Die  magischen  Kanaele,  Understandig  Media,  Duesseldorf/Wien  1968. Metropolis,  Nicholas  Constantine/Howlet,  Jack/Rota,  Gian  Carlo  (Hrsg.)  A  history  of  computing in  the  twentieth  century,  A  collection  of  essays.  New  York/London/Toronto/Sydney/San Francisco  1980. Neumann,  John  von,  AlIgemeine  und  logische  Theorie  der  Automaten.  In:  Kursbuch  8  1967  139- 175. Nietzsche,  Friedrich,  Geschichte  der  griechischen  Literatur.  (Vorlesung  Basel  1874-76)  In: Samtliche  Werke.  Muenchen1922  29  Bd  V  67  284 Oberliesen,  Rolf,  Information  Boten  und  Signale.  Geschichte  technischer Informationsverorbeitung  Reinbeck  1982 Ong,  WalterJ.,  Oralitaet  und  Literalitaet.  Die  Technologisierung  des  Wortes  Oploden  1987 Peters,  John  Durhom,  John  Locke  the  individual  and  the  origin  of  communication.  In:  Quarterly journal  of  speech,  August  1989. Posner,  Roland,  Mitteilungen  an  die  ferne  Zukunft.  Hintergrund  Anlass  Problemstellung  und Resultate  einer  Umfroge.  In:  Zeitschrift  fur  Semiotik  6  1984  195-227. Praun,  Albert,  Vernachlaessigte  Faktoren  in  der  Kriegsgeschichtsschreibung.  Das

Nachrichtenverbindungswesen  im  2.  Weltkrieg  ein  Stiefkind  der  militaerischen  Forschung. Wehrwissenschaftliche  Rundschou  H.3  1970  137-145. Rabiner,  Lawrence  R./Gold,  Bernhard,  Theory  and  application  of  digital  signal  processing Englewood  Cliffs  1975 Riep,  Wolfgang,  Das  Nachrichtenwesen  des  Altertums  Mit  besanderer  Rucksicht  ouf  die Roemer  Leipzig/Berlin  1913 Rasenkronz  Kar  Gearg  Wilhelm  Friedrich  Hegels  Leben  Berin  1844 Schenda,  Rudolf.  Volk  ohne  Buch.  Studien  zur  Sozialgeschichte  der  populaeren  Lesestoffe l770-1910.  Fronkfurt/M.  1970 Schenkel,  Wolfgang,  Wozu  die  Agypter  eine  Schrift  brauchten.  In:  Assmann,  Aleida  und Jan/Hardmeier,  Christof  (Hrsg.)  Schrift  und  Gedachinis.  Zur  Archaologie  der  literarischen Kommunikation  1.  Muenchen1983  45-63. Schiller,  Friedrich,  Was  heisst  und  zu  welchem  Ende  studiert  man  Universalgeschichte?  Eine akademische  Antritsrede  (Jena  1789)  In:  Samtliche  Werke  hrsg  v.  Eduard  von  der  Helen Stutgar/Berin  1904  Bd.  Xlll  3-24 Schivelbusch,  Wolfgang,  Geschichte  der  Eisenbahnreise.  Zur  Industrialisierung  von  Raum  und Zeit  im  19.  Jahrhundert  Muenchen1977. Schoen,  Erich,  Der  Verlust  der  Sinnlichkeit  oder  die  Verwandlung  des  Lesers.  Stuttgart  1987. Schwipps,  Werner,  Wortschlacht  im  AEther  In:  Deutsche  Welle  (Hrsg.)  Wortschlacht  im  AEther Der  deutsche  Auslandsrundfunk  im  Zweiten  Weltkrieg  Berin  1971  11-97 Shannon,  Claude  Elwood,  A  symbolic  analysis  of  relay  and  switching  circuits.  In:  Transactions of  the  American  institute  of  electrical  engineers  57  1938  713-723. Shannon,  Claude  Elwood,  Communication  in  the  presence  of  noise  In:  Proceeding  of  the institute  of  radio  engineers,  37,  1  949a,  10-21 Shannon,  Claude  Elwood,  Communicatian  theory  of  secrecy  systems.  In:  Bell  system  technical journal  1949b,  656-715 Sickert,  Klaus  (Hrsg.),  Automatische  Spracheingabe  und  Sprachausgabe.  Analyse,  Synthese und  Erkennung  menschlicher  Sprache  mit  digitalen  Systemen.  Haar  1983. Stephan,  Heinrich  von/Sater,  Karl,  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Post.  I.  Berlin  1928  II.  Berlin  III. 1935.111  Frankfurt/M  1951 Turing,  Allan  M,  Intelligence  Sevice.  Ausgewahlte  Schriften,  hrsg  v.  Datzler,  Bernhard/Kittler, Friedrich.  Berlin  1  9B7. Von  Creved,  Martin  L.,  Cammand  in  War  Cambridge  Mass.l/London  19B5 Vernani,  Jean-Pierre,  Les  origines  de  la  pensee  grecque.  Paris  1962. Virilio,  Paul,  Krieg  und  Kino  Logistik  der  Wahrnehmung.  Muenchen1  9B6

Voigt,  Fritz,  Verkehr.  I  Berlin  1973  11.  Berlin  1965. Vorstius,  Joris/Joost,  Siegfried,  Grundzuge  der  Bibliotheksgeschichte.  7  Aufl.  Wiesbaden  1977. Witfogel,  Karl,  Die  Orientalische  Despotie.  Eine  vergleichende  Untersuchung  totaler  Macht. Koln/Berlin  1962 Yates,  Frances  A.,  The  Art  of  Memory.  London  1966 Zglinicki,  Friedrich  von,  Der  Weg  des  Films.  Die  Geschichte  der  Kinematagraphie  und  ihrer Varlaufer  Berlin  1956. Zuse,  Konrad,  Der  Computer.  Mein  Lebenswerk.  2  Aufl.  Berlin/Heidelberg/New  York/Tokyo 1984. Professor  Friedrich  Kittler  is  one  of  Germany's  leading  media  theorists.  He  is  professor  of  Media History  and  Aesthetics  at  Humboldt  University-Berlin's  Institute  for  Aesthetics.
  CTheory.  All  Rights  Reserved

Understanding Media
The Extensions of Man

Marshall M c L u h a n Introduction by Lewis H. Lapham

T h e M I T Press C a m b r i d g e , Massachusetts L o n d o n , Englan d

First M I T Press edition, 1994  1964, 1994 Corinne McLuhan Introduction  1994 Massachusetts Institute of Technology All rights reserved. N o part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or infomation storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher. T h i s book was printed and bound in the United States of America. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data McLuhan, Marshall, 1911Understanding media : the extensions of man / Marshall M c L u h a n . -- 1st M I T Press ed. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references. I S B N 0-262-63159-8 1. Mass media. 2. Communication. 3. Communication and technology. I. Title. I I . Title: Extensions of man. P90.M26 1994 302.23--dc20 94-27722 CIP T h e author wishes to thank the publishers of the Times Literary Supplement for granting him permission to reprint the editorial of July 19, 1963, which appears as the chapter on T h e Printed Word in this book. Special acknowledgments are due to the National Association of Educational Broadcasters and the U . S . Office of Education, who in 1959-1960 provided liberal aid to enable the author to pursue research in the media of communication.

2 0 1918171615 1 4 131211

ContCntS

Introduction to the M I T Press Edition Lewis H. Lapham

ix

Parti
Introduction 3 7 1 T h e M e d i u m Is the Message 2 Media H o t and Cold 22

3 Reversal of the Overheated Medium 33 4 T h e Gadget Lover: Narcissus as Narcosis 41 5 H y b r i d Energy: Les Liaisons Dangereuses 48 6 Media as Translators 56

7 Challenge and Collapse: T h e Nemesis of Creativity 62

v

v i / Contents

Part II
8 T h e Spoken W o r d : Flower of Evil? 9 T h e W r i t t e n W o r d : A n Eye for an Ear 81 10 Roads and Paper Routes 89 106 119 77

11 N u m b e r : Profile of the C r o w d 12 Clothing: O u r Extended Skin 13 Housing: N e w Look and N e w Outlook 123 14 Money: T h e Poor Man's Credit Card 131 15 Clocks: T h e Scent of T i m e 16 T h e Print: H o w to D i g I t 145 157

17 Comics: MAD Vestibule to T V 18 T h e Printed W o r d : Architect of Nationalism 170 19 Wheel, Bicycle, and Airplane 20 T h e Photograph: T h e Brothelwithout-Walls 188 21 Press: Government by News Leak 203 22 Motorcar: T h e Mechanical Bride 23 Ads: Keeping Upset w i t h the Joneses 226 24 Games: T h e Extensions of M a n 25 Telegraph: T h e Social Hormone

164

179

217

234 246

26 T h e T y p e w r i t e r : Into the Age of the Iron W h i m 258 27 T h e Telephone: Sounding Brass or T i n k l i n g Symbol? 265

Contents I v'\\ 28 T h e Phonograph: T h e T o y T h a t Shrank the National Chest 275 29 Movies: T h e Reel World 30 Radio: T h e T r i b a l D r u m 31 Television: T h e T i m i d Giant 32 Weapons: War of the Icons 33 Automation: Learning a L i v i n g Further Readings for Media Study 284 297 308 338 346 361

Introduction

J Times

a m e s

Reston w r o t e i n The ( J u l y 7, 1957):

New

York

A health director . . . reported this week that a small mouse, which presumably had been watching television, attacked a little girl and her full-grown cat. . . . Both mouse and cat survived, and the incident is recorded here as a reminder that things seem to be changing. A f t e r three thousand years o f explosion, b y means o f fragmentary and mechanical technologies, the Wester n w o r l d is imploding . D u r i n g the mechanical ages w e had extended our bodies i n space. T o day, after more than a century o f elect r i c technology, w e have extended o u r central nervous system itself i n a global embrace, abolishing b o t h space and time as far as our planet is concerned. R a p i d l y , w e approach the final phase o f the extensions of man--the technological simulation o f consciousness, w h e n the creative process o f k n o w i n g w i l l be collectively and cor-

3

4/ 'Understanding

Media

porately extended to the w h o l e o f human society, m u c h as w e have already extended our senses and our nerves b y the various media. W h e t h e r the extension of consciousness, so l o n g sought b y advertisers f o r specific products, w i l l be "a good t h i n g " is a question that admits o f a w i d e solution. T h e r e is little possibility of answering such questions about the extensions o f man w i t h o u t considering all o f t h e m together. A n y extension, whether o f skin, hand, or f o o t , affects the w h o l e psychic and social complex. Some o f the principal extensions, together w i t h some of their psychic and social consequences, are studied i n this book. Just h o w l i t t l e consideration has been given to such matters i n the past can be gathered f r o m the consternation o f one o f the editors of this book. H e noted i n dismay that "seventy-five per cent of y o u r material is new. A successful book cannot venture to be more than ten per cent n e w . " Such a risk seems quite w o r t h taking at the present t i me w h e n the stakes are v e r y high, and the need t o understand the effects of the extensions o f man becomes more u r gent b y the hour. I n the mechanical age n o w receding, many actions could be taken w i t h o u t too m u c h concern. Slow movement insured that the reactions w e r e delayed f o r considerable periods o f time. T o d a y the action and the reaction occur almost at the same time. W e actually live m y t h i c a l l y and integrally, as i t were, b u t w e continue t o t h i n k i n the o l d , fragmented space and t i m e patterns of the pre-electric age. W e s t e r n man acquired f r o m the technology of literacy the p o w e r t o act w i t h o u t reacting. T h e advantages o f fragmenting himself i n this w a y are seen i n the case o f the surgeon w h o w o u l d be quite helpless i f he were t o become humanly involved i n his operation. W e acquired the art o f c a r r y i n g o u t the most dangerous social operations w i t h complete detachment. B u t our detachment was a posture o f noninvolvement. I n the electric age, w h e n our central nervous system is technologically extended to involve us i n the w h o l e of m a n k i n d and t o incorporate the whole of mankind i n us, w e necessarily participate, i n depth, i n the consequences o f our every action. I t is no longer possible to adopt the aloof and dissociated role o f the literate Westerner.

Introduction/S T h e Theater o f the A b s u r d dramatizes this recent dilemma o f Western man, the man o f action w h o appears n o t to be involved i n the action. Such is the o r i g i n and appeal o f Samuel Beckett's clowns. A f t e r three thousand years of specialist explosion and o f increasing specialism and alienation i n the technological extensions o f our bodies, our w o r l d has become compressional b y dramatic reversal. As electrically contracted, the globe is no more than a village. Electric speed i n b r i n g i n g all social and political functions together i n a sudden implosion has heightened human awareness o f responsibility t o an intense degree. I t is this implosive factor that alters the position o f the N e g r o , the teen-ager, and some other groups. T h e y can no longer be contained, i n the political sense o f limited association. T h e y are n o w involved i n our lives, as w e i n theirs, thanks to the electric media. T h i s is the A g e o f A n x i e t y f o r the reason of the electric implosion that compels commitment and participation, quite regardless o f any " p o i n t of v i e w . " T h e partial and specialized character o f the v i e w p o i n t , however noble, w i l l n o t serve at all i n the electric age. A t the i n f o r m a t i o n level the same upset has occurred w i t h the substitution o f the inclusive image f o r the mere viewpoint. I f the nineteenth c e n t u r y was the age of the editorial chair, ours is the century o f the psychiatrist's couch. As extension o f man the chair is a specialist ablation of the posterior, a sort of ablative absolute of backside, whereas the couch extends the integral being. T h e psychiatrist employs the couch, since i t removes the temptation t o express private points o f v i e w and obviates the need t o rationalize events. T h e aspiration o f our time f o r wholeness, empathy and depth o f awareness is a natural adjunct o f electric technology. T h e age o f mechanical i n d u s t r y that preceded us f o u n d vehement assert i o n o f private o u t l o o k the natural mode o f expression. E v e r y c u l ture and every age has its favorite model o f perception and knowledge that i t is inclined t o prescribe f o r everybody and everyt h i n g . T h e mark o f o u r time is its revulsion against imposed patterns. W e are suddenly eager t o have things and people declare their beings t o t a l l y . T h e r e is a deep f a i t h t o be f o u n d i n this new attitude--a faith that concerns the ultimate harmony o f all

6/Understanding

Media

being. Such is the faith i n w h i c h this book has been w r i t t e n . I t explores the contours o f our o w n extended beings i n our technologies, seeking the principle o f i n t e l l i g i b i l i ty i n each o f them. I n the f u l l confidence that i t is possible t o w i n an understanding o f these forms that w i l l b r i n g them into o r d e r l y service, I have looked at them anew, accepting v e r y little of the conventional wisdom concerning them. One can say o f media as R o b e rt T h e o bald has said o f economic depressions: " T h e r e is one additional factor that has helped to c o n t r o l depressions, and that is a better understanding of their development." Examination of the origin and development o f the individual extensions o f man should be preceded b y a look at some general aspects of the media, or extensions o f man, beginning w i t h the never-explained numbness that each extension brings about i n the individual and society.

1 The Medium Is the Message

I n a culture like ours, l o n g accustomed t o splitting and d i v i d i n g all things as a means o f c o n t r o l , i t is sometimes a b i t o f a shock t o be reminded that, i n operational and practical fact, the medium is the message. T h i s is merely t o say that the personal and social consequences o f any medium--that is, o f any extension of ourselves--result f r o m the new scale that is introduced into our affairs b y each extension of ourselves, or b y any ne w technology. T h u s , w i t h automation, f o r example, the new patterns o f human association tend t o eliminate jobs, i t is true. T h a t is the negative result. Positively, automation creates roles f o r people, w h i c h is t o say depth o f involvement i n their w o r k and human association that our preceding mechanical technolo g y had destroyed. M a n y people w o u l d be disposed t o say that i t was n o t the machine, b u t w h a t one d i d w i t h the machine, that was its meaning or message. I n terms of the ways i n w h i c h the machine

8/ 'Understanding

Media

altered our relations t o one another and to ourselves, i t mattered n o t i n the least whether i t t u r n e d o u t cornflakes or Cadillacs. T h e restructuring o f human w o r k and association was shaped b y the technique o f fragmentation that is the essence o f machine technology. T h e essence o f automation technology is the opposite. I t is integral and decentralist i n depth, just as the machine was f r a g mentary, centralist, and superficial i n its patterning of human relationships. T h e instance o f the electric l i g h t m a y prove illuminating i n this connection. T h e electric l i g h t is pure i n f o r m a t i o n . I t is a medium w i t h o u t a message, as i t were, unless i t is used t o spell out some verbal ad or name. T h i s fact, characteristic o f all media, means that the " c o n t e n t " o f any mediu m is always another medium. T h e content o f w r i t i n g is speech, just as the w r i t t e n w o r d is the content o f p r i n t , and p r i n t is the content o f the telegraph. I f i t is asked, " W h a t is the content o f speech?," i t is necessary t o say, " I t is an actual process o f thought , w h i c h is i n itself nonverbal." A n abstract painting represents direct manifestation o f creative t h o u g h t processes as they m i g h t appear i n computer designs. W h a t w e are considering here, however, are the psychic and social consequences o f the designs or patterns as they a m p l i f y or accelerate existing processes. F or the "message" of any medium or technology is the change o f scale or pace or pattern that i t introduces i n t o human affairs. T h e r a i l w a y d i d n o t i n t r o duce movement or transportation or wheel or road into human society, b u t i t accelerated and enlarged the scale of previous human functions, creating t o t a l l y new kinds o f cities and new kinds o f w o r k and leisure. T h i s happened whether the r a i l w ay functioned i n a tropical or a n o r t h e r n environment, and is quite independent o f the f r e i g h t o r content o f the r a i l w a y medium. T h e airplane, o n the other hand, b y accelerating the rate o f transportation, tends t o dissolve the r a i l w a y f o r m o f c i t y , politics, and association, quite independently o f w h a t the airplane is used for. L e t us r e t u r n to the electric light. W h e t h e r the l i g h t is being used f o r brain surgery or n i g h t baseball is a matter o f indifference.

The

Medium

Is the

Message/9

I t could be argued that these activities are i n some w a y the " c o n t e n t " o f the electric l i g h t , since they c o u l d n o t exist w i t h o u t the electric light. T h i s fact merely underlines the p o i n t that "the medium is the message" because i t is the m e d i u m that shapes and controls the scale and f o r m o f human association and action. T h e content or uses o f such media are as diverse as they are ineffectual in shaping the f o r m o f human association. Indeed, i t is o n l y too typical that the " c o n t e n t " o f any m e d i u m blinds us t o the character o f the medium. I t is o n l y today that industries have become aware o f the various kinds o f business i n w h i c h t h e y are engaged. W h e n I B M discovered that i t was n o t i n the business o f making office equipment or business machines, b u t that i t was i n the business o f processing i n f o r m a t i o n , then i t began to navigate w i t h clear vision. T h e General Electric Company makes a considerable p o r t i o n o f its profits f r o m electric l i g h t bulbs and l i g h t i n g systems. I t has n o t y e t discovered that, quite as m u c h as A . T . & T . , i t is i n the business of m o v i n g i n f o r m a t i o n . T h e electric l i g h t escapes attention as a communication medium just because i t has no "content. " A n d this makes i t an invaluable instance o f h o w people fail t o study media at all. F o r i t is n o t t i l l the electric l i g h t is used t o spell out some brand name that i t is noticed as a medium. T h e n i t is n o t the l i g h t b u t the " c o n t e n t " ( o r w h a t is really another m e d i u m ) that is noticed. T h e message o f the electric l i g h t is l i k e the message o f electric p o w e r i n industry, t o t a l l y radical, pervasive, and decentralized. F o r electric light and p o w e r are separate f r o m their uses, y e t t h e y eliminate time and space factors i n human association exactly as do radio, telegraph, telephone, and T V , creating involvement i n depth. A f a i r l y complete handbook f o r s t u d y i n g the extensions o f man could be made u p f r o m selections f r o m Shakespeare. Some m i g h t quibble about whether or n o t he was r e f e r r i n g t o T V i n these familiar lines f r o m Romeo and Juliet: But soft! what light through yonder window breaks? I t speaks, and yet says nothing. I n Othello, w h i c h , as m u c h as King Lear, is concerned w i t h the tormen t of people transformed b y illusions, there are these

10 /Understanding

Media

lines that bespeak Shakespeare's i n t u i t i o n o f the transforming powers of n e w media: Is there not charms By which the property of youth and maidhood May be abus'd? Have y o u not read Roderigo, O f some such thing? I n Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressida, w h i c h is almost completely devoted t o b o t h a psychic and social study of communication, Shakespeare states his awareness that true social and political navigation depend u p o n anticipating the consequences of i n novation: The providence that's i n a watchful state Knows almost every grain of Plutus' gold, Finds bottom i n the uncomprehensive deeps, Keeps place w i t h thought, and almost like the gods Does thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles. T h e increasing awareness o f the action o f media, quite i n dependently of their " c o n t e n t " or p r o g r a m m i n g, was indicated i n the annoyed and anonymous stanza: I n modern thought, ( i f not i n fact) Nothing is that doesn't act, So that is reckoned wisdom which Describes the scratch but not the itch. T h e same k i n d o f total, configurational awareness that reveals w h y the m e d i u m is socially the message has occurred i n the most recent and radical medical theories. I n his Stress of Life, Hans Selye tells of the dismay o f a research colleague o n hearing o f Selye's t h e o r y : W h e n he saw me thus launched on yet another enraptured description of what I had observed i n animals treated w i t h this or that impure, toxic material, he looked at me w i t h desperately sad eyes and said i n obvious despair: "But Selye, t r y to realize what you are doing before i t is too late! You have now decided to spend your entire life studying the pharmacology of d i r t ! " (Hans Selye, The Stress of Life)

The
v

Medium

Is the

Message/II

As Selye deals w i t h the total environmental situation i n his "stress" theory o f disease, so the latest approach t o media study considers not o n l y the " c o n t e n t " b u t the mediu m and the cultural matrix w i t h i n w h i c h the particular m e d i u m operates. T h e older unawareness of the psychic and social effects o f media can be illustrated f r o m almost any o f the conventional pronouncements. I n accepting an honorary degree f r o m the U n i v e r s i t y o f N o t r e Dame a f e w years ago, General D a v i d SarnofF made this statement: " W e are too prone t o make technological instruments the scapegoats f o r the sins o f those w h o w i e l d them. T h e products o f modern science are n o t i n themselves good or bad; i t is the w a y they are used that determines their value." T h a t is the voice o f the current somnambulism. Suppose w e were t o say, " A p p l e pie is i n itself neither good nor bad; i t is the w a y i t is used that determines its value." O r , " T h e smallpox virus is i n itself neither good n o r bad; i t is the w a y i t is used that determines its value." A g a i n , "Firearms are i n themselves neither good nor bad; i t is the w a y they are used that determines their value." T h a t is, i f the slugs reach the r i g h t people firearms are good. I f the T V tube fires the r i g h t ammunition at the r i g h t people i t is good. I am n o t being perverse. T h e r e is s i m p l y n o t h i n g i n the Sarnoff statement that w i l l bear scrutiny, f o r i t ignores the nature o f the medium, o f any and all media, i n the true Narcissus style o f one hypnotized b y the amputation and extension o f his o w n being i n a n e w technical f o r m ! General Sarnoff w e n t o n t o explain his attitude t o the technology of p r i n t , saying that i t was true that p r i n t caused m u c h trash t o circulate, b u t i t had also disseminated the Bible and the thoughts o f seers and philosophers. I t has never occurred t o General Sarnoff that any technology c o u l d do a n y t h i n g b u t add itself o n t o w h a t w e already are. Such economists as Robert Theobald, W . W . Rostow, and John Kenneth Galbraith have been explaining f o r years h o w i t is that "classical economics" cannot explain change or g r o w t h . A n d the paradox o f mechanization is that although i t is itself the cause o f maximal g r o w t h and change, the principle o f mechanization excludes the v e r y possibility of g r o w t h or the understanding o f change. For mechanization is achieved b y fragmentation of any

\2/Understanding

Media

process and b y p u t t i n g the fragmented parts i n a series. Yet, as D a v i d H u m e showed i n the eighteenth century, there is no principle o f causality i n a mere sequence. T h a t one t h i n g follows another accounts f o r n o t h i n g . N o t h i n g f o l l o w s f r o m f o l l o w i n g , except change. So the greatest o f all reversals occurred w i t h electricity, that ended sequence b y making things instant. W i t h instant speed the causes o f things began t o emerge t o awareness again, as they had n o t done w i t h things i n sequence and i n concatenation accordingly. Instead o f asking w h i c h came first, the chicken o r the egg, i t suddenly seemed that a chicken was an egg's idea f o r getting more eggs. Just before an airplane breaks the sound barrier, sound waves become visible o n the wings of the plane. T h e sudden visibility o f sound just as sound ends is an apt instance of that great pattern o f being that reveals new and opposite forms just as the earlier forms reach their peak performance. Mechanization was never so v i v i d l y fragmented or sequential as i n the b i r t h o f the movies, the moment that translated us beyond mechanism i n t o the w o r l d o f g r o w t h and organic interrelation. T h e movie, b y sheer speeding u p the mechanical, carried us f r o m the w o r l d o f sequence and connections i n t o the w o r l d o f creative configuration and structure. T h e message o f the movie medium is that o f transition f r o m lineal connections t o configurations. I t is the transition that produced the n o w quite correct observation: " I f i t w o r k s , it's obsolete." W h e n electric speed f u r t h e r takes over f r o m mechanical movie sequences, then the lines o f force i n structures and i n media become l o u d and clear. W e r e t u r n t o the inclusive f o r m of the i c o n . T o a h i g h l y literate and mechanized culture the movie appeared as a w o r l d o f t r i u m p h a n t illusions and dreams that money could b u y . I t was at this m o m e n t o f the movie that cubism occurred, and i t has been described b y E. H . G o m b r i c h (Art and Illusion) as " t h e most radical attempt t o stamp out ambiguit y and t o enforce one reading of the picture--that o f a man-made construction, a colored canvas." F o r cubism substitutes all facets of an object simultaneously f o r the " p o i n t o f v i e w " or facet o f perspective illusion. Instead o f the specialized illusion o f the t h i r d

The

Medium

Is the

Message/13

dimension on canvas, cubism sets up an interplay o f planes and contradiction or dramatic conflict o f patterns, lights, textures that "drives home the message" b y involvement. T h i s is held b y many to be an exercise i n painting, n o t i n illusion. I n other words, cubism, b y giving the inside and outside, the top, b o t t o m , back, and f r o n t and the rest, i n t w o dimensions, drops the illusion of perspective i n favor o f instant sensory awareness o f the w h o l e . Cubism, b y seizing o n instant total awareness, suddenly announced that the medium is the message. Is i t n o t evident that the moment that sequence yields t o the simultaneous, one is i n the w o r l d o f the structure and o f configuration? Is that n o t w h a t has happened i n physics as i n painting, p o e t r y , and i n communication? Specialized segments o f attention have shifted t o total field, and w e can n o w say, " T h e m e d i u m is the message" quite naturally. Before the electric speed and t o t a l field, i t was n o t obvious that the medium is the message. T h e message, i t seemed, was the " c o n t e n t , " as people used t o ask w h a t a painting was abott. Y e t t h e y never thought to ask w h a t a m e l o dy was about, nor w h a t a house or a dress was about. I n such matters, people retained some sense of the w h o l e pattern, o f f o r m and f u n c t i o n as a u n i t y . B u t i n the electric age this integral idea o f structure and configuration has become so prevalent that educational t h e o r y has taken u p the matter. Instead o f w o r k i n g w i t h specialized "problems" i n a r i t h metic, the structural approach n o w f o l l o w s the linea o f force i n the field o f number and has small children meditating about n u m ber theory and "sets." Cardinal N e w m a n said o f Napoleon, " H e understood the grammar o f g u n p o w d e r . " Napoleo n had paid some attention t o other media as w e l l , especially the semaphore telegraph that gave h i m a great advantage over his enemies. H e is o n record f o r saying that " T h r e e hostile newspapers are m o r e t o be feared than a thousand bayonets." Alexis de Tocqueville was the first t o master the grammar o f p r i n t and t y p o g r a p h y . H e was thus able t o read off the message o f c o m i n g change i n France and America as i f he were reading aloud f r o m a text that had been handed t o h i m . In, fact, the nineteenth century i n France and i n A m e r i c a was just such an

14/Understanding

Media

open book t o de Tocqueville because he had learned the grammar o f p r i n t . So he, also, k n e w w h e n that grammar d i d n o t apply. H e was asked w h y he d i d n o t w r i t e a book o n England, since he k n e w and admired England. H e replied: One would have to have an unusual degree of philosophical folly to believe oneself able to judge England i n six months. A year always seemed to me too short a time i n which to appreciate the United States properly, and i t is much easier to acquire clear and precise notions about the American Union than about Great Britain. I n America all laws derive in a sense f r o m the same line of thought. The whole of society, so to speak, is founded upon a single fact; everything springs f r o m a simple principle. One could compare America to a forest pierced by a multitude of straight roads all converging on the same point. One has only to find the center and everything is revealed at a glance. But i n England the paths r u n criss-cross, and i t is only by travelling down each one of them that one can build up a picture of the whole. D e Tocqueville, i n earlier w o r k o n the French Revolution, had explained h o w i t was the p r i n t e d w o r d that, achieving cultural saturation i n the eighteenth century, had homogenized the French nation. Frenchmen were the same k i n d o f people f r o m n o r t h t o south. T h e typographic principles o f u n i f o r m i t y , c o n t i n u i t y , and lineality had overlaid the complexities of ancient feudal and oral society. T h e R e v o l u t i on was carried o u t b y the n e w literati and lawyers. I n England, however, such was the power of the ancient oral traditions o f c o m m o n law, backed b y the medieval institution o f Parliament, that no u n i f o r m i t y or c o n t i n u i t y o f the n e w visual p r i n t culture could take complete hold. T h e result was that the most i m p o r t a n t event i n English history has never taken place; namely, the English Revolution o n the lines of the French Revolut i o n . T h e A m e r i c a n Revolution had no medieval legal institutions t o discard or t o r o o t out, apart f r o m monarchy. A n d many have held that the America n Presidency has become v e r y m u c h more personal and monarchical than any European monarch ever could be. De Tocqueville's contrast between England and America

The

Medium

Is the

Message/15

is clearly based o n the fact o f t y p o g r a p h y and o f p r i n t culture creating u n i f o r m i t y and c o n t i n u i t y . England, he says, has rejected this principle and clung t o the dynamic or oral common-law tradition. Hence the discontinuity and unpredictable qualit y o f English culture. T h e grammar o f p r i n t cannot help t o construe the message of oral and n o n w r i t t e n culture and institutions. T h e English aristocracy was p r o p e r l y classified as barbarian b y M a t t h e w A r n o l d because its power and status had n o t h i n g t o do w i t h literacy or w i t h the cultural forms o f t y p o g r a p h y . Said the D u k e of Gloucester t o E d w a r d G i b b o n u p o n the publication o f his Decline and Fall: " A n o t h e r damned fat book, eh, M r . G i b bon? Scribble, scribble, scribble, eh, M r . G i b b o n ? " De T o c q u e ville was a h i g h l y literate aristocrat w h o was quite able to be detached f r o m the values and assumptions o f t y p o g r a p h y. T h a t is w h y he alone understood the grammar of t y p o g r a p h y. A n d i t is o n l y on those terms, standing aside f r o m any structure or medium , that its principles and lines o f force can be discerned. For any medium has the p o w e r o f imposing its o w n assumption o n the u n w a r y . Prediction and c o n t r o l consist i n avoiding this subliminal state o f Narcissus trance. B u t the greatest aid t o this end is simply i n k n o w i n g that the spell can occur immediately u p o n contact, as i n the first bars o f a melody. A Passage to India b y E. M . Forster is a dramatic study o f the i n a b i l i ty of oral and i n t u i t i v e oriental culture t o meet w i t h the rational, visual European patterns of experience. "Rational," o f course, has f o r the W e s t l o n g meant " u n i f o r m and continuous and sequential." I n other words, w e have confused reason w i t h literacy, and rationalism w i t h a single technology. T h u s i n the electric age man seems t o the conventional W e s t t o become irrational. I n Forster's novel the moment o f t r u t h and dislocation f r o m the typographic trance o f the W e s t comes i n the Marabar Caves. Adela Quested's reasoning powers cannot cope w i t h the total inclusive field o f resonance that is India. A f t e r the Caves: " L i f e w e n t on as usual, b u t had no consequences, that is t o say, sounds d i d not echo nor t h o u g h t develop. E v e r y t h i n g seemed c u t off at its r o o t and therefore infected w i t h illusion." A Passage to India (the phrase is f r o m W h i t m a n , w h o saw

16 /Understanding

Media

Americ a headed Eastward) is a parable o f Western man i n the electric age, and is o n l y incidentally related t o Europe or the Orient. T h e ultimate conflict between sight and sound, between w r i t t e n and oral kinds o f perception and organization o f existence is u p o n us. Since understanding stops action, as Nietzsche observed, w e can moderate the fierceness o f this conflict b y understanding the media that extend us and raise these wars w i t h i n and w i t h o u t us. Detribalization b y literacy and its traumatic effects o n tribal man is the theme o f a book b y the psychiatrist J. C. Carothers, The African Mind in Health and Disease ( W o r l d H e a l t h O r g a n i zation, Geneva, 1953). M u c h o f his material appeared i n an article i n Psychiatry magazine, November, 1 9 5 9 : " T h e Culture, Psychiatry, and the W r i t t e n W o r d . " A g a i n , i t is electric speed that has revealed the lines o f force operating f r o m W e s t e r n technology i n the remotest areas o f bush, savannah, and desert. One example is the Bedouin w i t h his battery radio o n board the camel. Subm e r g i n g natives w i t h floods o f concepts f o r w h i c h n o t h i n g has prepared them is the normal action o f all o f our technology. B u t w i t h electric media W e s t e r n man himself experiences exactly the same inundation as the remote native. W e are no more prepared t o encounter radio and T V i n our literate milieu than the native o f Ghana is able t o cope w i t h the literacy that takes h i m o u t o f his collective t r i b a l w o r l d and beaches h i m i n individual isolation. W e are as n u m b i n our n e w electric w o r l d as the native involve d i n our literate and mechanical culture. Electric speed mingles the cultures o f prehistory w i t h the dregs o f industrial marketeers, the nonliterate w i t h the semiliterate and the postliterate. Menta l b r e a k d o w n o f v a r y i n g degrees is the v e r y c o m m on result o f u p r o o t i n g and inundation w i t h n e w i n f o r m a t i o n and endless n e w patterns o f i n f o r m a t i o n . W y n d h a m Lewis made this a theme o f his g r o u p o f novels called The Human Age. T h e first o f these, The Childermass, is concerned precisely w i t h accelerated media change as a k i n d o f massacre o f the i n nocents. I n our o w n w o r l d as w e become more aware o f the effects of technology o n psychic f o r m a t i o n and manifestation, w e are losing all confidence i n our r i g h t t o assign guilt. A n c i e n t pre-

The

Medium

Is the Message 17

historic societies regard violent crime as pathetic. T h e killer is regarded as w e do a cancer v i c t i m . " H o w terrible i t must be t o feel like t h a t , " they say. J. M . Synge t o o k u p this idea v e r y effectively i n his Playboy of the Western World. I f the criminal appears as a nonconformist w h o is unable t o meet the demand o f technology that w e behave i n u n i f o r m and continuous patterns, literate man is quite inclined t o see others w h o cannot c o n f o r m as somewhat pathetic. Especially the child, the cripple, the w o m a n , and the colored person appear i n a w o r l d of visual and typographic technology as victims o f injustice. O n the other hand, i n a culture that assigns roles instead o f jobs t o people--the d w a r f , the skew, the child create their o w n spaces. T h e y are n o t expected t o f i t i n t o some u n i f o r m and repeatable niche that is n o t their size a n y w a y . Consider the phrase "It's a man's w o r l d . " A s a quantitative observation endlessly repeated f r o m w i t h i n a homogenized culture, this phrase refers t o the men in such a culture w h o have t o be homogenized Dagwoods i n order to belong at all. I t is i n our I . Q . testing that w e have produced the greatest flood o f misbegottten standards. Unawar e o f our t y p o graphic cultural bias, our testers assume that u n i f o r m and c o n tinuous habits are a sign o f intelligence, thus eliminating the ear man and the tactile man. C. P. Snow, r e v i e w i n g a book o f A . L . Rowse (The New York Times Book Review, December 24, 1961) o n Appeasement and the road t o M u n i c h , describes the t o p level o f British brains and experience i n the 1930s. " T h e i r I.Q.'s were m u c h higher than usual among political bosses. W h y were t h e y such a disaster?" T h e v i e w o f Rowse, Snow approves: " T h e y w o u l d n o t listen t o warnings because they d i d n o t w i s h t o hear." Being anti-Red made i t impossible f o r the m t o read the message o f H i t l e r . B u t their failure was as n o t h i n g compared t o o u r present one. T h e A m e r i c a n stake i n literacy as a technology or u n i f o r m i t y applied to every level o f education, government, industry, and social life is t o t a l l y threatened b y the electric technology. T h e threat of Stalin or H i t l e r was external. T h e electric technology is w i t h i n the gates, and w e are n u m b , deaf, b l i n d , and mute about its encounter w i t h the Gutenberg technology, o n and t h r o u g h w h i c h

18 /Understanding

Media

the American w a y of life was f o r m e d . I t is, however, no time t o suggest strategies w h e n the threat has n o t even been a c k n o w l edged t o exist. I am i n the position o f Louis Pasteur telling doctors that their greatest enemy was quite invisible, and quite unrecognized b y them. O u r conventional response to all media, namely that i t is h o w the y are used that counts, is the numb stance of the technological idiot. For the " c o n t e n t " of a m e d i u m is like the j u i c y piece o f meat carried b y the burglar t o distract the w a t c h dog o f the m i n d . T h e effect o f the medium is made strong and intense just because i t is given another medium as "content." T h e content o f a movie is a novel or a play or an opera. T h e effect of the movie f o r m is not related t o its program content. T h e " c o n t e n t " o f w r i t i n g or p r i n t is speech, b u t the reader is almost entirely unaware either of p r i n t or o f speech. A r n o l d T o y n b e e is innocent o f any understanding o f media as they have shaped history, b u t he is f u l l of examples that the student o f media can use. A t one moment he can seriously suggest that adult education, such as the W o r k e r s Educational Associat i o n i n Britain, is a useful counterforce t o the popular press. T o y n bee considers that although all o f the oriental societies have i n our time accepted the industrial technology and its political consequences: " O n the cultural plane, however, there is no u n i f o r m corresponding tendency." (Somervell, I . 267) T h i s is like the voice of the literate man, floundering i n a milieu of ads, w h o boasts, "Personally, I pay no attention to ads." T h e spiritual and cultural reservations that the oriental peoples may have t o w a r d our technology w i l l avail them not at all. T h e effects of technology do not occur at the level of opinions or concepts, b u t alter sense ratios or patterns o f perception steadily and w i t h o u t any resistance. T h e serious artist is the o n l y person able t o encounter technology w i t h i m p u n i t y , just because he is an expert aware o f the changes i n sense perception. T h e operation of the money m e d i u m i n seventeenth-century Japan had effects n o t unlike the operation o f t y p o g r a p h y i n the W e s t . T h e penetration of the money economy, w r o t e G . B. Sansom ( i n Japan, Cresset Press, L o n d o n , 1931) "caused a slow b u t

The

Medium

Is the

Message/19

irresistible revolution, culminating i n the breakdow n o f feudal government and the resumption of intercourse w i t h foreign countries after more than t w o hundred years o f seclusion." M o n e y has reorganized the sense life of peoples just because i t is an extension of our sense lives. Thi s change does n o t depend u p o n approval or disapproval o f those l i v i n g i n the society. A r n o l d T o y n b e e made one approach t o the transforming power o f media i n his concept of "etherialization," w h i c h he holds to be the principle of progressive simplification and efficiency i n any organization or technology. T y p i c a l l y , he is ignoring the effect o f the challenge o f these forms u p o n the response of our senses. H e imagines that i t is the response of our opinions that is relevant t o the effect o f media and technology i n society, a " p o i n t of v i e w " that is plainly the result of the t y p o graphic spell. For the man i n a literate and homogenized society ceases to be sensitive t o the diverse and discontinuous life of forms. H e acquires the illusion o f the t h i r d dimension and the "private point of v i e w " as part of his Narcissus fixation, and is quite shut off f r o m Blake's awareness or that o f the Psalmist, that w e become w h a t w e behold. T o d a y w h e n w e w a n t to get our bearings i n our o w n culture, and have need to stand aside f r o m the bias and pressure exerted b y any technical f o r m o f human expression, w e have o n l y to visit a society where that particular f o r m has n o t been felt, or a historical period i n w h i c h i t was u n k n o w n . Professor W i l b u r Schramm made such a tactical move i n s t y d y i n g Television in the Lives of Our Children. H e f o u n d areas where T V had not penetrated at all and ran some tests. Since he had made no study o f the peculiar nature o f the T V image, his tests were o f " c o n t e n t " preferences, v i e w i n g time, and vocabulary counts. I n a w o r d , his approach t o the problem was a l i t e r a r y one, albeit u n c o n sciously so. Consequently, he had n o t h i n g t o report. H a d his methods been employed i n 1500 A.D . t o discover the effects of the printed book i n the lives of children or adults, he could have f o u n d out nothing o f the changes i n human and social psychology resulting f r o m t y p o g r a p h y . P r i n t created individualism and nation-

20/ "Understanding

Media

alism i n the sixteenth century. Program and " c o n t e n t " analysis offer no clues to the magic of these media or to their subliminal charge. Leonard D o o b , i n his repor t Communication in Africa, tells of one A f r i c a n w h o t o o k great pains t o listen each evening t o the BBC news, even t h o u g h he could understand n o t h i n g of i t . Just t o be i n the presence of those sounds at 7 P . M . each day was i m p o r t a n t f o r h i m . H i s attitude to speech was like ours t o melody--the resonant intonation was meaning enough. I n the seventeenth century our ancestors still shared this native's attitude t o the forms o f media, as is plain i n the f o l l o w i n g sentiment o f the Frenchman Bernard L a m expressed i n The Art of Speaking ( L o n d o n , 1696): 'Tis an effect of the Wisdom of God, who created Man to be happy, that whatever is useful to his conversation (way of life) is agreeable to him . . . because all victual that conduces to nourishment is relishable, whereas other things that cannot be assimulated and be turned into our substance are insipid. A Discourse cannot be pleasant to the Hearer that is not easie to the Speaker; nor can i t be easily pronounced unless i t be heard w i t h delight. H e r e is an equilibrium t h e o r y of human diet and expression such as even n o w w e are o n l y striving t o w o r k o u t again f o r media after centuries o f fragmentation and specialism. Pope Pius X I I was deeply concerned that there be serious study o f the media today. O n February 17, 1950, he said: I t is not an exaggeration to say that the future of modern society and the stability of its inner life depend i n large part on the maintenance of an equilibrium between the strength of the techniques of communication and the capacity of the individual's own reaction. Failure i n this respect has f o r centuries been t y p i c a l and total f o r m a n k i n d . Subliminal and docile acceptance o f media impact has made them prisons w i t h o u t walls f o r their human users. As A . J L i e b l i n g remarked i n his b o o k The Press, 2L man is n o t free i f he cannot see where he is going, even i f he has a g u n t o help h i m get there. Fo r each of the media is also a p o w e r f u l weapon

The

Medium

Is the

Message/2l

w i t h w h i c h to clobber other media and other groups. T h e result is that the present age has been one o f multiple civil wars that :irc n o t limited to the w o r l d o f art and entertainment. I n War and Human Progress, Professor J. U . N e f declared: " T h e total wars of our time have been the result of a series o f intellectual misrakes . . . " I f the formative p o w e r i n the media are the media themselves, that raises a host o f large matters that can o n l y be mentioned here, although t h e y deserve volumes. N a m e l y , that technological media are staples or natural resources, exactly as are coal and cotton and o i l . A n y b o d y w i l l concede that society whose econo m y is dependent u p o n one or t w o major staples like c o t t o n , or grain, or lumber, or fish, or cattle is going to have some o b vious social patterns o f organization as a result. Stress o n a f e w major staples creates extreme instability i n the economy b u t great endurance i n the population. T h e pathos and humor o f the A m e r i can South are embedded i n such an economy of limited staples. For a society configured b y reliance o n a f e w commodities accepts them as a social b o n d quite as m u c h as the metropolis does the press. C o t t o n and o i l , like radio and T V , become " f i x e d charges" on the entire psychic life o f the c o m m u n i t y . A n d this pervasive fact creates the unique cultural flavor o f any society. I t pays through the nose and all its other senses f o r each staple that shapes its life. T h a t our human senses, o f w h i c h all media are extensions, are also fixed charges on our personal energies, and that t h e y also configure the awareness and experience o f each one o f us, m a y be perceived i n another connection mentioned b y the psychologist C. G . Jung: Every Roman was surrounded by slaves. The slave and his psychology flooded ancient Italy, and every Roman became inwardly, and of course unwittingly, a slave. Because living constantly in the atmosphere of slaves, he became infected through the unconscious w i t h their psychology. N o one can shield himself f r o m such an influence (Contributions to Analytical Psychology, London, 1928).

8

The Spoken Word
Flower of Evil?

A f e w seconds f r o m a popular disk-jockey show were t y p e d o u t as f o l l o w s : That's Patty Baby and that's the girl w i t h the dancing feet and that's Freddy Cannon there on the David Mickie Show i n the night time ooohbah scubadoo how are you booboo. Next we'll be Swinging on a Star and sssshhhwwoooo and sliding on a moonbeam. Waaaaaaa how about that . . . one of the goodest guys w i t h you . . . this is lovable kissable D . M . i n the p.m. at 22 minutes past nine o'clock there, aahhrightie, we're gonna have a Hitline, all you have to do is call W A l n u t 5-1151, W A l n u t 5-1151, tell them what number i t is on the Hitline. Dave M i c k i e alternately soars, groans, swings, sings, solos, intones, and scampers, always reacting t o his o w n actions. H e moves entirely i n the spoken rather than the w r i t t e n area o f experience. I t is i n this w a y that audience participation is created. T h e spoken w o r d involves all o f the sen-

77

78 /Understanding

Media

ses dramatically, t h o u g h h i g h l y literate people tend t o speak as connectedly and casually as possible. T h e sensuous involvement natural to cultures i n w h i c h literacy is n o t the r u l i n g f o r m of experience is sometimes indicated i n travel guides, as i n this item f r o m a guide to Greece: You w i l l notice that many Greek men seem to spend a lot of time counting the beads of what appear to be amber rosaries. But these have no religious significance. They are komboloia or " w o r r y beads," a legacy f r o m the Turks, and Greeks click them on land, on the sea, i n the air to ward off that insupportable silence which threatens to reign whenever conversation lags. Shepherds do i t , cops do i t , stevedores and merchants in their shops do i t . A n d i f you wonder w h y so few Greek women wear beads, you'll know it's because their husbands have pre-empted them for the simple pleasure of clicking. More aesthetic than thumb-twiddling, less expensive than smoking, this Queeg-like obsession indicates a tactile sensuousness characteristic of a race which has produced the western world's greatest sculpture . . . W h e r e the heavy visual stress of literacy is lacking i n a culture, there occurs another f o r m o f sensuous involvement and cultural appreciation that our Greek guide explains whimsically: . . . do not be surprised at the frequency w i t h which you are patted, petted and prodded in Greece. You may end up feeling like the family dog . . . in an affectionate family. This propensity to pat seems to us a tactile extension of the avid Greek curiosity noted before. It's as though your hosts are trying to find out what you are made of. T h e w i d e l y separate characters of the spoken and w r i t t e n w o r d s are easy t o study today w h e n there is ever closer t o u c h w i t h nonliterate societies. One native, the o n l y literate member o f his group , t o l d o f acting as reader f o r the others w h e n they received letters. H e said he felt impelled to p u t his fingers to his ears w h i l e reading aloud, so as n o t t o violate the p r i v a c y o f their letters. T h i s is interesting testimony t o the values of privacy fostered b y the visual stress of phonetic w r i t i n g . Such separation o f the senses, and o f the individual f r o m the group, can scarcely occur w i t h o u t the influence o f phonetic w r i t i n g . T h e spoken

The

Spoken

Word/19

w o r d does n o t afford the extension and amplification o f the visual p o w e r needed f o r habits o f individualism and privacy. I t helps t o appreciate the nature o f the spoken w o r d t o contrast i t w i t h the w r i t t e n f o r m . A l t h o u g h phonetic w r i t i n g separates and extends the visual p o w e r o f words, i t is comparat i v e l y crude and slow. T h e r e are n o t m a n y ways o f w r i t i n g " t o n i g h t , " b u t Stanislavsky used t o ask his y o u n g actors t o p r o nounce and stress i t f i f t y different ways w h i l e the audience w r o t e d o w n the different shades o f feeling and meaning expressed. M a n y a page o f prose and m a n y a narrative has been devoted t o expressi n g w h a t was, i n effect, a sob, a moan, a laugh, or a piercing scream. T h e w r i t t e n w o r d spells o u t i n sequence w h a t is quick and i m p l i c i t i n the spoken w o r d . A g a i n , i n speech w e tend t o react t o each situation that occurs, reacting i n tone and gesture even t o our o w n act of speaki n g . B u t w r i t i n g tends t o be a k i n d o f separate or specialist action i n w h i c h there is little o p p o r t u n i t y or call f o r reaction. T h e literate man or society develops the tremendous p o w e r o f acting i n any matter w i t h considerable detachment f r o m the feelings or emotional involvement that a nonliterate man or society w o u l d experience. H e n r i Bergson, the French philosopher, lived and w r o t e i n a t r a d i t i o n o f t h o u g h t i n w h i c h i t was and is considered that language is a human technology that has impaired and diminished the values o f the collective unconscious. I t is the extension of man i n speech that enables the intellect t o detach itself f r o m the vastly w i d e r reality. W i t h o u t language, Bergson suggests, human i n telligence w o u l d have remained totally involved i n the objects o f its attention. Language does f o r intelligence w h a t the wheel does f o r the feet and the b o d y . I t enables t h e m t o move f r o m t h i n g t o t h i n g w i t h greater ease and speed and ever less involvement. Language extends and amplifies man b u t i t also divides his facul ties. H i s collective consciousness or i n t u i t i v e awareness is d i m i n ished b y this technical extension of consciousness that is speech. Bergson argues i n Creative Evolution that even consciousness is an extension o f m an that dims the bliss o f u n i o n i n the collective unconscious. Speech acts t o separate man f r o m man,

80/ 'Understanding

Media

and m a n k i n d f r o m the cosmic unconscious. As an extension or u t t e r i n g ( o u t e r i n g ) o f all our senses at once, language has always been held t o be man's richest art f o r m , that w h i c h distinguishes h i m f r o m the animal creation. I f the human ear can be compared t o a radio receiver that is able to decode electromagnetic waves and recode them as sound, the human voice may be compared to the radio transmitter i n being able to translate sound i n t o electromagnetic waves. T h e power of the voice to shape air and space into verbal patterns may w e l l have been preceded b y a less specialized expression of cries, grunts, gestures, and commands, o f song and dance. T h e patterns of the senses that are extended i n the various languages o f men are as varied as styles o f dress and art. Each mother tongue teaches its users a w a y o f seeing and feeling the w o r l d , and of acting i n the w o r l d , that is quite unique. O u r new electric technology that extends our senses and nerves i n a global embrace has large implications f o r the f u t u r e of language. Electric technology does n o t need w o r d s any more than the digital computer needs numbers. E l e c t r i c i t y points the w a y to an extension of the process o f consciousness itself, on a w o r l d scale, and w i t h o u t any verbalization whatever. Such a state o f collective awareness may have been the preverbal conditio n o f men. Language as the technology o f human extension, whose powers o f division and separation w e k n o w so w e l l , m a y have been the " T o w e r of Babel" b y w h i c h men sought t o scale the highest heavens. T o d a y computers h o l d o u t the promise o f a means of instant translation of any code or language i n t o any other code or language. T h e computer, i n short, promises b y technology a Pentecostal c o n d i t i o n of universal understanding and u n i t y . T h e next logical step w o u l d seem to be, n o t t o translate, b u t t o by-pass languages i n favor o f a general cosmic consciousness w h i c h m i g h t be v e r y like the collective unconscious dreamt of b y Bergson. T h e c o n d i t i o n of "weightlessness," that biologists say promises a physical i m m o r t a l i t y , m a y be paralleled b y the cond i t i o n of speechlessness that c o u l d confer a perpetuity o f collective harmony and peace.

Q MI .1.

Prince M o d u p e w r o t e o f his encounter w i t h the w r i t t e n w o r d i n his W e s t A f r i c a n
d a y s

The Written Word
A rp c J ' an Ear

.
The one crowded space i n Father Perry's house was his bookshelves. I gradually came to understand that the marks on the pages were trapped words. Anyone could learn to decipher the symbols and turn the trapped words loose again into speech. The ink of the print trapped the thoughts; they could no more get away than a doomboo could get out of a pit. W h e n the f u l l realization of what this meant flooded over me, I experienced the same thrill and amazement as when I had m y first glimpse of the bright lights of Konakry. I shivered w i t h the intensity of m y desire to learn to do this wondrous thing myself.

81

I n striking contrast to the native's eagerness, there are the current anxieties o f civilized man concerning the w r i t t e n w o r d . T o some Westerners the w r i t t e n or p r i n t e d w o r d has become a v e r y t o u c h y

82 /Understanding

Media

subject. I t is t r u e that there is more material w r i t t e n and printed and read today than ever before, b u t there is also a n e w electric technology that threatens this ancient technology of literacy b u i l t on the phonetic alphabet. Because o f its action i n extending our central nervous system, electric technology seems t o favor the inclusive and participational spoken w o r d over the specialist w r i t t e n w o r d . O u r Western values, b u i l t o n the w r i t t e n w o r d , have already been considerably affected b y the electric media of telephone, radio, and T V . Perhaps that is the reason w h y many h i g h l y literate people i n our time find i t difficult t o examine this question w i t h o u t getting into a m o r a l panic. T h e r e is the f u r t h e r circumstance that, d u r i n g his more than t w o thousand years of literacy, W e s t e r n man has done little to study or t o understand the effects o f the phonetic alphabet i n creating many o f his basic patterns of culture. T o begin n o w t o examine the question may, therefore, seem too late. Suppose that, instead o f displaying the Stars and Stripes, w e were t o w r i t e the w o r d s " A m e r i c a n flag" across a piece o f c l o t h and to display that. W h i l e the symbols w o u l d convey the same meaning, the effect w o u l d be quite different. T o translate the r i c h visual mosaic o f the Stars and Stripes into w r i t t e n f o r m w o u l d be t o deprive i t o f most o f its qualities o f corporate image and o f experience, y e t the abstract literal b o n d w o u l d remain m u c h the same. Perhaps this illustration w i l l serve t o suggest the change the tribal man experiences w h e n he becomes literate. N e a r l y all the emotional and corporate f a m i l y feeling is eliminated f r o m his relationship w i t h his social g r o u p . H e is emotionally free t o separate f r o m the tribe and t o become a civilized individual, a man of visual organization w h o has u n i f o r m attitudes, habits, and rights w i t h all other civilized individuals. T h e Greek m y t h about the alphabet was that Cadmus, reputedly the k i n g w h o introduced the phonetic letters i n t o Greece, sowed the dragon's teeth, and t h e y sprang u p armed men. L i k e any other m y t h , this one capsulates a prolonged process i n t o a flashing insight. T h e alphabet meant p o w e r and a u t h o r i t y and c o n t r o l o f m i l i t a r y structures at a distance. W h e n combined w i t h papyrus, the alphabet spelled the end o f the stationary temple bureauc-

The

Written

Word/'83

racies and the priestly monopolies of knowledge and p o w e r . U n l i k e pre-alphabetic w r i t i n g , w h i c h w i t h its innumerable signs was difficult t o master, the alphabet c o u l d be learned i n a f e w hours. T h e acquisition o f so extensive a knowledge and so complex a skill as pre-alphabetic w r i t i n g represented, w h e n applied to such u n w i e l d y materials as b r i c k and stone, insured f o r the scribal caste a m o n o p o l y of priestly power. T h e easier alphabet and the l i g h t , cheap, transportable papyrus together effected the transfer o f p o w e r f r o m the priestly t o the m i l i t a r y class. A l l this is implied i n the m y t h about Cadmus and the dragon's teeth, including the fall o f the c i t y states, the rise o f empires and m i l i t a r y bureaucracies. I n terms o f the extensions o f man, the theme of the dragon's teeth i n the Cadmus m y t h is o f the utmost importance. Elias Canetti i n Crowds and Power reminds us that the teeth are an obvious agent of p o w e r i n man, and especially i n many animals. Languages are filled w i t h testimony t o the grasping, devouring p o w e r and precision o f teeth. T h a t the p o w e r o f letters as agents o f aggressive order and precision should be expressed as extensions o f the dragon's teeth is natural and f i t t i n g . T e e t h are emphatically visual i n their lineal order. Letters are n o t o n l y like teeth visually, b u t their power t o p u t teeth i n t o the business o f empire-building is manifest i n our W e s t e r n history. T h e phonetic alphabet is a unique technology. T h e r e have been m a n y kinds o f w r i t i n g , pictographic and syllabic, b u t there is o n l y one phonetic alphabet i n w h i c h semantically meaningless letters are used to correspond to semantically meaningless sounds. T h i s stark divison and parallelism between a visual and an a u d i t o ry w o r l d was b o t h crude and ruthless, c u l t u r a l l y speaking. T h e phonetically w r i t t e n w o r d sacrifices w o r l d s o f meaning and perception that were secured b y forms like the hieroglyph and the Chinese ideogram. These c u l t u r a l ly richer forms o f w r i t i n g , h o w ever, offered men no means of sudden transfer f r o m the magically discontinuous and traditional w o r l d o f the t r i b a l w o r d i n t o the cool and u n i f o r m visual medium. M a n y centuries o f ideogrammic use have n o t threatened the seamless w e b o f f a m i l y and t r i b a l subtleties o f Chinese society. O n the other hand, a single genera-

84/ 'Understanding

Media

t i o n o f alphabetic literacy suffices i n A f r i c a today, as i n G a u l t w o thousand years ago, t o release the individual initially, at least, f r o m the tribal w e b . T h i s fact has n o t h i n g t o do w i t h the content of the alphabetized w o r d s ; i t is the result o f the sudden breach between the a u d i t o r y and the visual experience of man. O n l y the phonetic alphabet makes such a sharp division i n experience, giving to its user an eye f o r an ear, and freeing h i m f r o m the t r i b a l trance of resonating w o r d magic and the w e b o f kinship. I t can be argued, then, that the phonetic alphabet, alone, is the technology that has been the means o f creating " c i v i l i z e d man"--the separate individuals equal before a w r i t t e n code o f law. Separateness of the individual, c o n t i n u i t y of space and o f time, and u n i f o r m i t y o f codes are the prime marks of literate and civilized societies. T r i b a l cultures like those o f the I n d i a n and the Chinese may be greatly superior t o the Western cultures, i n the range and delicacy o f their perceptions and expression. H o w e v e r , w e are not here concerned w i t h the question of values, b u t w i t h the configurations of societies. T r i b a l cultures cannot entertain the possibility o f the individual or o f the separate citizen. T h e i r ideas o f spaces and times are neither continuous n o r u n i f o r m , b u t compassional and compressional i n their intensity. I t is i n its p o w e r t o extend patterns of visual u n i f o r m i t y and c o n t i n u i t y that the "message" of the alphabet is f e l t b y cultures. As an intensification and extension o f the visual f u n c t i o n , the phonetic alphabet diminishes the role o f the other senses o f sound and t o u c h and taste i n any literate culture. T h e fact that this does n o t happen i n cultures such as the Chinese, w h i c h use nonphonetic scripts, enables them t o retain a r i c h store o f inclusive perception i n depth of experience that tends t o become eroded i n civilized c u l tures of the phonetic alphabet. F o r the ideogram is an inclusive gestalt, n o t an analytic dissociation o f senses and functions like phonetic w r i t i n g . T h e achievements of the W e s t e r n w o r l d , i t is obvious, are test i m o n y to the tremendous values o f literacy. B u t m a n y people are also disposed t o object that w e have purchased our structure o f specialist technology and values at t o o h i g h a price. Certainly the

The

Written

Word/%5

lineal structuring o f rational life b y phonetic literacy has involved us i n an interlocking set o f consistencies that are striking enough t o j u s t i f y a m u c h more extensive i n q u i r y than that o f the present chapter. Perhaps there are better approaches along quite d i f ferent lines; f o r example, consciousness is regarded as the mark o f a rational being, y e t there is n o t h i ng lineal or sequential about the total field of awareness that exists i n any moment of consciousness. Consciousness is n o t a verbal process. Yet d u r i n g all our centuries o f phonetic literacy w e have favored the chain of inference as the m a r k o f logic and reason. Chinese w r i t i n g , i n contrast, invests each ideogram w i t h a total i n t u i t i o n of being and reason that allows o n l y a small role to visual sequence as a m a r k o f mental effort and organization. I n W e s t e r n literate society i t is still plausible and acceptable to say that something " f o l l o w s " f r o m something, as i f there were some cause at w o r k that makes such a sequence. I t was D a v i d H u m e w h o , i n the eighteenth century, demonstrated that there is no causality indicated i n any sequence, natural or logical. T h e sequential is merely additive, n o t causative. Hume's argument, said Immanuel K a n t , "awoke me f r o m m y dogmatic slumber." Neither H u m e nor Kant, however, detected the hidden cause o f our Western bias t o w a r d sequence as " l o g i c " i n the a l l pervasive technology o f the alphabet. T o d a y i n the electric age w e feel as free to invent nonlineal logics as w e do to make n o n Euclidean geometries. Even the assembly line, as the method o f analytic sequence f o r mechanizing every k i n d of making and p r o d u c t i o n , is nowadays y i e l d i n g to new forms. O n l y alphabetic cultures have ever mastered connected lineal sequences as pervasive forms o f psychic and social organization. T h e breaking up o f every k i n d of experience i n t o u n i f o r m units i n order t o produce faster action and change of f o r m (applied knowledge) has been the secret o f Western p o w er over man and nature alike. T h a t is the reason w h y our W e s t e r n industrial programs have quite i n v o l u n t a r i l y been so militant, and o u r m i l i t a r y programs have been so industrial. B o t h are shaped b y the alphabet i n their technique o f transformation and c o n t r o l b y m a k i n g all situations u n i f o r m and continuous. T h i s procedure,

86/ 'Understanding

Media

manifest even i n the Graeco-Roman phase, became more intense w i t h the u n i f o r m i t y and repeatability o f the Gutenberg development. Civilization is b u i l t on literacy because literacy is a u n i f o r m processing o f a culture b y a visual sense extended i n space and time b y the alphabet. I n tribal cultures, experience is arranged b y a dominant a u d i t o r y sense-life that represses visual values. T h e auditory sense, unlike the cool and neutral eye, is hyper-esthetic and delicate and all-inclusive. O r a l cultures act and react at the same time. Phonetic culture endows men w i t h the means of repressing their feelings and emotions w h e n engaged i n action. T o act w i t h o u t reacting, w i t h o u t involvement, is the peculiar advantage o f Western literate man. T h e story o f The Ugly American describes the endless succession o f blunders achieved b y visual and civilized Americans w h e n confronted w i t h the tribal and a u d i t o r y cultures of the East. A s a civilized U N E S C O experiment, r u n n i n g w a t e r -- w i t h its lineal organization of pipes--was installed recently i n some Indian v i l lages. Soon the villagers requested that the pipes be removed, f o r i t seemed t o them that the w h o l e social life o f the village had been impoverished w h e n i t was no longer necessary f o r all t o visit the communal w e l l . T o us the pipe is a convenience. W e do n o t t h i n k o f i t as culture or as a p r o d u c t o f literacy, any more than w e t h i n k of literacy as changing our habits, our emotions, or our perceptions. T o nonliterate people, i t is perfectly obvious that the most commonplace conveniences represent total changes i n culture. T h e Russians, less permeated w i t h the patterns o f literate c u l ture than Americans, have m u c h less difficult y i n perceiving and accommodating the Asiatic attitudes. For the W e s t , literacy has l o n g been pipes and taps and streets and assembly lines and inventories. Perhaps most potent o f all as an expression o f literacy is our system of u n i f o r m p r i c i n g that penetrates distant markets and speeds the turn-ove r o f commodities. Even our ideas of cause and effect i n the literate W e s t have l o n g been i n the f o r m o f things i n sequence and succession, an idea that strikes any tribal or audit o r y culture as quite ridiculous, and one that has lost its prime place i n our o w n n e w physics and b i o l o g y .

The

Written

Word/$7

A l l the alphabets i n use i n the W e s t e r n w o r l d , f r o m that o f Russia t o that of the Basques, f r o m that o f Portugal t o that o f Peru, are derivatives o f the Graeco-Roman letters. T h e i r unique separation o f sight and sound f r o m semantic and verbal content made them a most radical technology f o r the translation and homogenization o f cultures. A l l other forms o f w r i t i n g had served merely one culture, and had served t o separate that culture f r o m others. T h e phonetic letters alone could be used t o translate, albeit crudely, the sounds o f any language i n t o one-and-the-same visual code. T o d a y , the e f f o r t o f the Chinese t o use our phonetic letters t o translate their language has r u n i n t o special problems i n the w i d e tonal variations and meanings o f similar sounds. T h i s has led t o the practice o f fragmenting Chinese monosyllables i n t o polysyllables i n order t o eliminate tonal a m b i g u i t y. T h e W e s t e r n phonetic alphabet is n o w at w o r k transforming the central a u d i t o r y features o f the Chinese language and culture i n order that China can also develop the lineal and visual patterns that give central u n i t y and aggregate u n i f o r m power t o W e s t e r n w o r k and organization. A s w e move o u t o f the Gutenberg era o f our o w n culture, w e can more readily discern its p r i m a r y features of homogeneity, u n i f o r m i t y , and c o n t i n u i t y . These were the characteristics that gave the Greeks and Romans their easy ascendancy over the nonliterate barbarians. T h e barbarian or t r i b a l man, then as n o w , was hampered b y cultura l pluralism, uniqueness, and discontinuity. T o sum u p , pictographic and hieroglyphic w r i t i n g as used i n Babylonian, M a y a n , and Chinese cultures represents an extension o f the visual sense f o r storing and expediting access t o human experience. A l l o f these forms give pictoria l expression t o oral meanings. As such, they approximate the animated cartoon and are extremely u n w i e l d y , r e q u i r i n g many signs f o r the i n f i n i t y of data and operations o f social action. I n contrast, the phonetic alphabet, b y a f e w letters o n l y , was able t o encompass all languages. Such an achievement, however, involved the separation o f b o t h signs and sounds f r o m their semantic and dramatic meanings. N o other system o f w r i t i n g had accomplished this feat. T h e same separation o f sight and sound and meaning that is peculiar t o the phonetic alphabet also extends to its social and

88 /Understanding

Media

psychological effects. Literate man undergoes m u c h separation of his imaginative, emotional, and sense life, as Rousseau (and later the Romantic poets and philosophers) proclaimed l o n g ago. T o d a y the mere mention of D . H . Lawrence w i l l serve t o recall the t w e n t i e t h - c e n t u ry efforts made t o by-pass literate man i n order t o recover human "wholeness." I f W e s t e r n literate man undergoes m u c h dissociation of inner sensibility f r o m his use of the alphabet, he also wins his personal freedom t o dissociate himself f r o m clan and f a m i l y . T h i s freedom t o shape an individual career manifested itself i n the ancient w o r l d i n m i l i t a r y life. Careers were open t o talents i n Republican Rome, as m u c h as i n Napoleonic France, and f o r the same reasons. T h e new literacy had created an homogeneous and malleable milieu i n w h i c h the m o b i l i t y o f armed groups and o f ambitious individuals, equally, was as novel as i t was practical.

+ if you are involved or participating in a discussion you are taking a side
+ with mcluhan you have to tune your ears totally differently
+ mcluhan's big aphorism is "the medium is the message"
+ choose a certain form in writing to convey an emotional arc - if the medium is the message, the corollary is that the message is destined by the structure of the medium
+ the whole second portion of the book is about "extensions" of humanity, once you have that extension, you amputate part of yourself.
+ The invention of the wheel extended and amputated the foot
+ you gain something and lose something essential when you use a new medium
+ the invention of recording technologies - the idea that you could hear a voice from the death, without a body connected to it
+ plato's phaedrus - writing does too much in allowing us to extend and relax our memory
+ what does it mean to be able to understand and read a person's thoughts when that person is not next to you to help you understand?

+ McLuhan's Global Village
+ created by instant electronic communication

+ McLuhan's Pattern Recognition
+ it's hard to understand something from slower presentation
+ as things speed up, it's easier to discern a pattern or message
+ it's compelling that you can trust algorithms to use them as a pulse on the culture
+ McLuhan was trained by the New Critics

+ how to split this massive content into something we can find and seek

+ The people who set up the file as a metaphor or a window as a metaphor - Xerox PARC
+ allen Kay - the dynabook - screen with a keyboard - use it in education
+ The iPad is not the dynabook because the idea for the dynabook was to mirror input and output consumption levels - producing and consuming content at similar rates
+ The Dyanbook was supposed to facilitate an equal exchange

+ **read the global village**
+ Ong and McLuhan are both Catholics, and that affects their readings
+ McLuhan was a convert to Catholicism, but wrote very little about it
+ no thing could have an intent 
+ you can only do certain things with a television set and those purposes are designed into the artifact from the start - 
+ McLuhan is a cultural analyst - the works don't matter at all, we're going to analyze the objects
+ Archaeologists pick up books and tools out of the ground, and ask what does this tool make available that wasn't possible before?
+ He challenges us to rethink things as a tool rather than as an event
+ "watchdog of the mind" a second level awareness of what's happening and the more you're drawn into it, the less there's that second self analyzing it
+ "the global village" - a divide between the eastern and western world, ideas of oral vs print society
+ McLuhan sets up duality - Western world thinks rationally, in straight lines of print and sentences - Eastern world thinks in oral cultures
+ Is McLuhan hugely Orientalist in saying we're all becoming tribal? Or whether there's a lot of possibilities in thinking about he future of culture.Ong
Orality and Literacy
The Technologizing of the Word

Walter J.

30th Anniversary Edition With additional chapters by John Hartley

First published in 1982 by Methuen & Co. Ltd New edition published 2002 by Routledge This 30th anniversary edition published 2012 by Routledge 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada by Routledge 711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business  1982, 2002 Walter J. Ong; selected content  2012 John Hartley The right of Walter J. Ong and John Hartley to be identified as authors of this work has been asserted by them in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data Ong, Walter J. Orality and literacy : the technologizing of the word / Walter J. Ong, with additional chapters by John Hartley. p. cm.  (30th anniversary ed.) (3rd ed.) Includes bibliographical references and indexes. 1. Language and culture. 2. Oral tradition. 3. Writing. 4. Written communication. I. Hartley, John, 1948- II. Title. P35.O5 2013 306.44dc23 2012005539 ISBN 9780415538374 (hbk) ISBN 9780415538381 (pbk) ISBN 9780203103258 (ebk) Typeset in Joanna by RefineCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk

CONTENTS

General Editor's Preface Before Ongism John Hartley Acknowledgements Introduction 1 The orality of language The literate mind and the oral past Did you say `oral literature'?
2

ix xi xxix 1 5 5 10 16 16 17 20 27 31 31 33

The modern discovery of primary oral cultures Early awareness of oral tradition The Homeric question Milman Parry's discovery Consequent and related work Some psychodynamics of orality Sounded word as power and action You know what you can recall: mnemonics and formulas

3

vi

contents

Further characteristics of orally based thought and expression (i) Additive rather than subordinative (ii) Aggregative rather than analytic (iii) Redundant or `copious' (iv) Conservative or traditionalist (v) Close to the human lifeworld (vi) Agonistically toned (vii) Empathetic and participatory rather than objectively distanced (viii) Homeostatic (ix) Situational rather than abstract Oral memorization Verbomotor lifestyle The noetic role of heroic `heavy' figures and of the bizarre The interiority of sound Orality, community and the sacral Words are not signs
4

36 37 38 39 41 42 43 45 46 49 57 67 69 70 73 74 77 77 78 80 82 84 92 95 100 102 107 110 113 115 115 121 121

Writing restructures consciousness The new world of autonomous discourse Plato, writing and computers Writing is a technology What is `writing' or `script'? Many scripts but only one alphabet The onset of literacy From memory to written records Some dynamics of textuality Distance, precision, grapholects and magnavocabularies Interactions: rhetoric and the places Interactions: learned languages Tenaciousness of orality Print, space and closure Hearing-dominance yields to sight-dominance Space and meaning (i) Indexes

5

contents

vii

(ii) Books, contents and labels (iii) Meaningful surface (iv) Typographic space More diffuse effects Print and closure: intertextuality Post-typography: electronics
6

124 124 126 127 129 133 136 136 137 138 144 148 153 154 157 161 162 166 168 171 172 174 177 194

Oral memory, the story line and characterization The primacy of the story line Narrative and oral cultures Oral memory and the story line Closure of plot: travelogue to detective story The `round' character, writing and print Some theorems Literary history New Criticism and Formalism Structuralism Textualists and deconstructionists Speech-act and reader-response theory Social sciences, philosophy, biblical studies Orality, writing and being human `Media' versus human communication The inward turn: consciousness and the text

7

Bibliography Index After Ongism John Hartley

205 222 229

References for Hartley Chapters Index for Hartley Chapters

4
WRITING RESTRUCTURES CONSCIOUSNESS
THE NEW WORLD OF AUTONOMOUS DISCOURSE
A deeper understanding of pristine or primary orality enables us better to understand the new world of writing, what it truly is, and what functionally literate human beings really are: beings whose thought processes do not grow out of simply natural powers but out of these powers as structured, directly or indirectly, by the technology of writing. Without writing, the literate mind would not and could not think as it does, not only when engaged in writing but normally even when it is composing its thoughts in oral form. More than any other single invention, writing has transformed human consciousness. Writing establishes what has been called `context-free' language (Hirsch 1977, pp. 213, 26) or `autonomous' discourse (Olson 1980a), discourse which cannot be directly questioned or contested as oral speech can be because written discourse has been detached from its author. Oral cultures know a kind of autonomous discourse in fixed ritual formulas (Olson 1980a, pp. 18794; Chafe 1982), as well as in vatic sayings or prophesies, for which the utterer himself or herself is considered only the channel, not the source. The Delphic oracle was not

78

orality and literacy

responsible for her oracular utterances, for they were held to be the voice of the god. Writing, and even more print, has some of this vatic quality. Like the oracle or the prophet, the book relays an utterance from a source, the one who really `said' or wrote the book. The author might be challenged if only he or she could be reached, but the author cannot be reached in any book. There is no way directly to refute a text. After absolutely total and devastating refutation, it says exactly the same thing as before. This is one reason why `the book says' is popularly tantamount to `it is true'. It is also one reason why books have been burnt. A text stating what the whole world knows is false will state falsehood forever, so long as the text exists. Texts are inherently contumacious.

PLATO, WRITING AND COMPUTERS
Most persons are surprised, and many distressed, to learn that essentially the same objections commonly urged today against computers were urged by Plato in the Phaedrus (2747) and in the Seventh Letter against writing. Writing, Plato has Socrates say in the Phaedrus, is inhuman, pretending to establish outside the mind what in reality can be only in the mind. It is a thing, a manufactured product. The same of course is said of computers. Secondly, Plato's Socrates urges, writing destroys memory. Those who use writing will become forgetful, relying on an external resource for what they lack in internal resources. Writing weakens the mind. Today, parents and others fear that pocket calculators provide an external resource for what ought to be the internal resource of memorized multiplication tables. Calculators weaken the mind, relieve it of the work that keeps it strong. Thirdly, a written text is basically unresponsive. If you ask a person to explain his or her statement, you can get an explanation; if you ask a text, you get back nothing except the same, often stupid, words which called for your question in the first place. In the modern critique of the computer, the same objection is put, `Garbage in, garbage out'. Fourthly, in keeping with the agonistic mentality of oral cultures, Plato's Socrates also holds it against writing that the written word cannot defend itself as the natural spoken word can: real speech and thought always exist essentially in a context of give-and-take between real persons.

writing restructures consciousness

79

Writing is passive, out of it, in an unreal, unnatural world. So are computers. A fortiori, print is vulnerable to these same charges. Those who are disturbed by Plato's misgivings about writing will be even more disturbed to find that print created similar misgivings when it was first introduced. Hieronimo Squarciafico, who in fact promoted the printing of the Latin classics, also argued in 1477 that already `abundance of books makes men less studious' (quoted in Lowry 1979, pp. 2931): it destroys memory and enfeebles the mind by relieving it of too much work (the pocket-computer complaint once more), downgrading the wise man and wise woman in favor of the pocket compendium. Of course, others saw print as a welcome leveler: everyone becomes a wise man or woman (Lowry 1979, pp. 312). One weakness in Plato's position was that, to make his objections effective, he put them into writing, just as one weakness in anti-print positions is that their proponents, to make their objections more effective, put the objections into print. The same weakness in anti-computer positions is that, to make them effective, their proponents articulate them in articles or books printed from tapes composed on computer terminals. Writing and print and the computer are all ways of technologizing the word. Once the word is technologized, there is no effective way to criticize what technology has done with it without the aid of the highest technology available. Moreover, the new technology is not merely used to convey the critique: in fact, it brought the critique into existence. Plato's philosophically analytic thought, as has been seen (Havelock 1963), including his critique of writing, was possible only because of the effects that writing was beginning to have on mental processes. In fact, as Havelock has beautifully shown (1963), Plato's entire epistemology was unwittingly a programmed rejection of the old oral, mobile, warm, personally interactive lifeworld of oral culture (represented by the poets, whom he would not allow in his Republic). The term idea, form, is visually based, coming from the same root as the Latin video, to see, and such English derivatives as vision, visible, or videotape. Platonic form was form conceived of by analogy with visible form. The Platonic ideas are voiceless, immobile, devoid of all warmth, not interactive but isolated, not part of the human lifeworld at all but

80

orality and literacy

utterly above and beyond it. Plato of course was not at all fully aware of the unconscious forces at work in his psyche to produce this reaction, or overreaction, of the literate person to lingering, retardant orality. Such considerations alert us to the paradoxes that beset the relationships between the original spoken word and all its technological transformations. The reason for the tantalizing involutions here is obviously that intelligence is relentlessly reflexive, so that even the external tools that it uses to implement its workings become `internalized', that is, part of its own reflexive process. One of the most startling paradoxes inherent in writing is its close association with death. This association is suggested in Plato's charge that writing is inhuman, thing-like, and that it destroys memory. It is also abundantly evident in countless references to writing (and/or print) traceable in printed dictionaries of quotations, from 2 Corinthians 3:6, `The letter kills but the spirit gives life' and Horace's reference to his three books of Odes as a `monument' (Odes iii.30. 1), presaging his own death, on to and beyond Henry Vaughan's assurance to Sir Thomas Bodley that in the Bodleian Library at Oxford `every book is thy epitaph'. In Pippa Passes, Robert Browning calls attention to the still widespread practice of pressing living flowers to death between the pages of printed books, `faded yellow blossoms/twixt page and page'. The dead flower, once alive, is the psychic equivalent of the verbal text. The paradox lies in the fact that the deadness of the text, its removal from the living human lifeworld, its rigid visual fixity, assures its endurance and its potential for being resurrected into limitless living contexts by a potentially infinite number of living readers (Ong 1977, pp. 23071).

WRITING IS A TECHNOLOGY
Plato was thinking of writing as an external, alien technology, as many people today think of the computer. Because we have by today so deeply interiorized writing, made it so much a part of ourselves, as Plato's age had not yet made it fully a part of itself (Havelock 1963), we find it difficult to consider writing to be a technology as we commonly assume printing and the computer to be. Yet writing (and especially alphabetic writing) is a technology, calling for the use of tools and

writing restructures consciousness

81

other equipment: styli or brushes or pens, carefully prepared surfaces such as paper, animal skins, strips of wood, as well as inks or paints, and much more. Clanchy (1979, pp. 88115) discusses the matter circumstantially, in its western medieval context, in his chapter entitled `The technology of writing'. Writing is in a way the most drastic of the three technologies. It initiated what print and computers only continue, the reduction of dynamic sound to quiescent space, the separation of the word from the living present, where alone spoken words can exist. By contrast with natural, oral speech, writing is completely artificial. There is no way to write `naturally'. Oral speech is fully natural to human beings in the sense that every human being in every culture who is not physiologically or psychologically impaired learns to talk. Talk implements conscious life but it wells up into consciousness out of unconscious depths, though of course with the conscious as well as unconscious co-operation of society. Grammar rules live in the unconscious in the sense that you can know how to use the rules and even how to set up new rules without being able to state what they are. Writing or script differs as such from speech in that it does not inevitably well up out of the unconscious. The process of putting spoken language into writing is governed by consciously contrived, articulable rules: for example, a certain pictogram will stand for a certain specific word, or a will represent a certain phoneme, b another, and so on. (This is not to deny that the writerreader situation created by writing deeply affects unconscious processes involved in composing in writing, once one has learned the explicit, conscious rules. More about this later.) To say writing is artificial is not to condemn it but to praise it. Like other artificial creations and indeed more than any other, it is utterly invaluable and indeed essential for the realization of fuller, interior, human potentials. Technologies are not mere exterior aids but also interior transformations of consciousness, and never more than when they affect the word. Such transformations can be uplifting. Writing heightens consciousness. Alienation from a natural milieu can be good for us and indeed is in many ways essential for full human life. To live and to understand fully, we need not only proximity but also distance. This writing provides for consciousness as nothing else does.

82

orality and literacy

Technologies are artificial, but  paradox again  artificiality is natural to human beings. Technology, properly interiorized, does not degrade human life but on the contrary enhances it. The modern orchestra, for example, is the result of high technology. A violin is an instrument, which is to say a tool. An organ is a huge machine, with sources of power  pumps, bellows, electric generators  totally outside its operator. Beethoven's score for his Fifth Symphony consists of very careful directions to highly trained technicians, specifying exactly how to use their tools. Legato: do not take your finger off one key until you have hit the next. Staccato: hit the key and take your finger off immediately. And so on. As musicologists well know, it is pointless to object to electronic compositions such as Morton Subotnik's The Wild Bull on the grounds that the sounds come out of a mechanical contrivance. What do you think the sounds of an organ come out of? Or the sounds of a violin or even of a whistle? The fact is that by using a mechanical contrivance, a violinist or an organist can express something poignantly human that cannot be expressed without the mechanical contrivance. To achieve such expression of course the violinist or organist has to have interiorized the technology, made the tool or machine a second nature, a psychological part of himself or herself. This calls for years of `practice', learning how to make the tool do what it can do. Such shaping of a tool to oneself, learning a technological skill, is hardly dehumanizing. The use of a technology can enrich the human psyche, enlarge the human spirit, intensify its interior life. Writing is an even more deeply interiorized technology than instrumental musical performance is. But to understand what it is, which means to understand it in relation to its past, to orality, the fact that it is a technology must be honestly faced.

WHAT IS `WRITING' OR `SCRIPT'?
Writing, in the strict sense of the word, the technology which has shaped and powered the intellectual activity of modern man, was a very late development in human history. Homo sapiens has been on earth perhaps some 50,000 years (Leakey and Lewin 1979, pp. 141 and 168). The first script, or true writing, that we know, was developed

writing restructures consciousness

83

among the Sumerians in Mesopotamia only around the year 3500 BC (Diringer 1953; Gelb 1963). Human beings had been drawing pictures for countless millennia before this. And various recording devices or aides-mmoire had been used by various societies: a notched stick, rows of pebbles, other tallying devices such as the quipu of the Incas (a stick with suspended cords onto which other cords were tied), the `winter count' calendars of the Native American Plains Indians, and so on. But a script is more than a mere memory aid. Even when it is pictographic, a script is more than pictures. Pictures represent objects. A picture of a man and a house and a tree of itself says nothing. (If a proper code or set of conventions is supplied, it might: but a code is not picturable, unless with the help of another unpicturable code. Codes ultimately have to be explained by something more than pictures; that is, either in words or in a total human context, humanly understood.) A script in the sense of true writing, as understood here, does not consist of mere pictures, of representations of things, but is a representation of an utterance, of words that someone says or is imagined to say. It is of course possible to count as `writing' any semiotic mark, that is, any visible or sensible mark which an individual makes and assigns a meaning to. Thus a simple scratch on a rock or a notch on a stick interpretable only by the one who makes it would be `writing'. If this is what is meant by writing, the antiquity of writing is perhaps comparable to the antiquity of speech. However, investigations of writing which take `writing' to mean any visible or sensible mark with an assigned meaning merge writing with purely biological behavior. When does a footprint or a deposit of feces or urine (used by many species of animals for communication  Wilson 1975, pp. 2289) become `writing'? Using the term `writing' in this extended sense to include any semiotic marking trivializes its meaning. The critical and unique breakthrough into new worlds of knowledge was achieved within human consciousness not when simple semiotic marking was devised but when a coded system of visible marks was invented whereby a writer could determine the exact words that the reader would generate from the text. This is what we usually mean today by writing in its sharply focused sense. With writing or script in this full sense, encoded visible markings

84

orality and literacy

engage words fully so that the exquisitely intricate structures and references evolved in sound can be visibly recorded exactly in their specific complexity and, because visibly recorded, can implement production of still more exquisite structures and references, far surpassing the potentials of oral utterance. Writing, in this ordinary sense, was and is the most momentous of all human technological inventions. It is not a mere appendage to speech. Because it moves speech from the oral aural to a new sensory world, that of vision, it transforms speech and thought as well. Notches on sticks and other aides-mmoire lead up to writing, but they do not restructure the human lifeworld as true writing does. True writing systems can and usually do develop gradually from a cruder use of mere memory aides. Intermediate stages exist. In some coded systems the writer can predict only approximately what the reader will read off, as in the system developed by the Vai in Liberia (Scribner and Cole 1978) or even in ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics. The tightest control of all is achieved by the alphabet, although even this is never quite perfect in all instances. If I mark a document `read', this might be a past participle (pronounced to rhyme with `red') indicating that the document has been gone over, or it might be an imperative (pronounced to rhyme with `reed') indicating that it is to be gone over. Even with the alphabet, extra-textual context is sometimes needed, but only in exceptional cases  how exceptional will depend on how well the alphabet has been tailored to a given language.

MANY SCRIPTS BUT ONLY ONE ALPHABET
Many scripts across the world have been developed independently of one another (Diringer 1953; Diringer 1960; Gelb 1963): Mesopotamian cuneiform 3500 BC (approximate dates here from Diringer 1962), Egyptian hieroglyphics 3000 BC (with perhaps some influence from cuneiform), Minoan or Mycenean `Linear B' 1200 BC, Indus Valley script 30002400 BC, Chinese script 1500 BC, Mayan script AD 50, Aztec script AD 1400. Scripts have complex antecedents. Most if not all scripts trace back directly or indirectly to some sort of picture writing, or, sometimes perhaps, at an even more elemental level, to the use of tokens. It has

writing restructures consciousness

85

been suggested that the cuneiform script of the Sumerians, the first of all known scripts (c. 3500 BC), grew at least in part out of a system of recording economic transactions by using clay tokens encased in small, hollow but totally closed pod-like containers or bullae, with indentations on the outside representing the tokens inside (Schmandt-Besserat 1978). Thus the symbols on the outside of the bulla  say, seven indentations  carried with them, inside the bulla, evidence of what they represented  say, seven little clay artefacts distinctively shaped, to represent cows, or ewes or other things not yet decipherable  as though words were always proffered with their concrete significations attached. The economic setting of such prechirographic use of tokens could help associate them with writing, for the first cuneiform script, from the same region as the bullae, whatever its exact antecedents, served mostly workaday economic and administrative purposes in urban societies. Urbanization provided the incentive to develop record keeping. Using writing for imaginative creations, as spoken words have been used in tales or lyric, that is, using writing to produce literature in the more specific sense of this term, comes quite late in the history of script. Pictures can serve simply as aides-mmoire, or they can be equipped with a code enabling them to represent more or less exactly specific words in various grammatical relation to each other. Chinese character writing is still today basically made up of pictures, but pictures stylized and codified in intricate ways which make it certainly the most complex writing system the world has ever known. Pictographic communication such as found among early Native American Indians and many others (Mackay 1978, p. 32) did not develop into a true script because the code remained too unfixed. Pictographic representations of several objects served as a kind of allegorical memorandum for parties who were dealing with certain restricted subjects which helped determine in advance how these particular pictures related to each other. But often, even then, the meaning intended did not come entirely clear. Out of pictographs (a picture of a tree represents the word for a tree), scripts develop other kinds of symbols. One kind is the ideograph, in which the meaning is a concept not directly represented by the picture but established by code: for example, in the Chinese pictograph a stylized picture of two trees does not represent the words `two

86

orality and literacy

trees' but the word `woods'; stylized pictures of a woman and child side-by-side represent the word `good', and so on. The spoken word for woman is [ny], for child [dz], for good [hau]: the pictorial etymology, as here, need have no relationship to the phonemic etymology. Writers of Chinese relate to their language quite differently from Chinese speakers who cannot write. In a special sense, numerals such as 1, 2, 3 are interlinguistic ideographs (though not pictographs): they represent the same concept but not the same sound in languages which have entirely different words for 1, 2, 3. And even within the lexicon of a given language, the signs 1, 2, 3 and so on are in a way connected directly with the concept rather than the word: the words for 1 (`one') and 2 (`two') relate to the concepts `1st' and `2nd' but not to the words `first' and `second'. Another kind of pictograph is rebus writing (the picture of the sole of a foot could represent in English also the fish called a sole, sole in the sense of only, or soul as paired with body; pictures of a mill, a walk, and a key in that order could represent the word `Milwaukee'). Since at this point the symbol represents primarily a sound, a rebus is a kind of phonogram (sound-symbol), but only mediately: the sound is designated not by an abstract coded sign, as a letter of the alphabet, but by a picture of one of the several things the sound signifies. All pictographic systems, even with ideographs and rebuses, require a dismaying number of symbols. Chinese is the largest, most complex, and richest: the K'anghsi dictionary of Chinese in AD 1716 lists 40,545 characters. No Chinese or Sinologist knows them all, or ever did. Few Chinese who write can write all of the spoken Chinese words that they can understand. To become significantly learned in the Chinese writing system normally takes some twenty years. Such a script is basically time-consuming and litist. There can be no doubt that the characters will be replaced by the roman alphabet as soon as all the people in the People's Republic of China master the same Chinese language (`dialect'), the Mandarin now being taught everywhere. The loss to literature will be enormous, but not so enormous as a Chinese typewriter using over 40,000 characters. One advantage of a basically pictographic system is that persons speaking different Chinese `dialects' (really different Chinese languages, mutually incomprehensible, though basically of the same

writing restructures consciousness

87

structure) who are unable to understand one another's speech can understand one another's writing. They read off different sounds for the same character (picture), somewhat as a Frenchman and a Luba and a Vietnamese and an Englishman will know what each other means by the Arabic numerals 1, 2, 3, and so on, but will not recognize the numeral if pronounced by one of the others. (However, the Chinese characters are basically pictures, though exquisitely stylized, as 1, 2, 3 are not.) Some languages are written in syllabaries, in which each sign represents a consonant and a following vowel sound. Thus the Japanese Katakana syllabary has five separate symbols respectively for ka, ke, ki, ko, ku, five others for ma, me, mi, mo, mu, and so on. The Japanese language happens to be so constituted that it can utilize a syllabary script: its words are made up of parts always consisting of a consonantal sound followed by a vowel sound (n functions as a quasisyllable), with no consonant clusters (as in `pitchfork', `equipment'). With its many different kinds of syllables, and its frequent consonant clusters, English could not be effectively managed in a syllabary. Some syllabaries are less developed than Japanese. In that of the Vai in Liberia, for example, there is not a full one-to-one correspondence between the visual symbols and the units of sound. The writing provides only a kind of map to the utterance it registers, and it is very difficult to read, even for a skilled scribe (Scribner and Cole 1978, p. 456). Many writing systems are in fact hybrid systems, mixing two or more principles. The Japanese system is hybrid (besides a syllabary, it uses Chinese characters, pronounced in its own non-Chinese way); the Korean system is hybrid (besides hangul, a true alphabet, perhaps the most efficient of all alphabets, it uses Chinese characters pronounced its own way); the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic system was hybrid (some symbols were pictographs, some ideographs, some rebuses); Chinese character writing itself is hybrid (mixed pictographs, ideographs, rebuses, and various combinations, often of extreme complexity, cultural richness and poetic beauty). Indeed, because of the tendency of scripts to start with pictographs and move to ideographs and rebuses, perhaps most writing systems other than the alphabet are to some degree hybrid. And even alphabetic writing becomes hybrid when it writes 1 instead of one.

88

orality and literacy

The most remarkable fact about the alphabet no doubt is that it was invented only once. It was worked up by a Semitic people or Semitic peoples around the year 1500 BC, in the same general geographic area where the first of all scripts appeared, the cuneiform, but two millennia later than the cuneiform. (Diringer 1962, pp. 1212, discusses the two variants of the original alphabet, the North Semitic and the South Semitic.) Every alphabet in the world  Hebrew, Ugaritic, Greek, Roman, Cyrillic, Arabic, Tamil, Malayalam, Korean  derives in one way or another from the original Semitic development, though, as in Ugaritic and Korean script, the physical design of the letters may not always be related to the Semitic design. Hebrew and other Semitic languages, such as Arabic, do not to this day have letters for vowels. A Hebrew newspaper or book still today prints only consonants (and so-called semivowels [j] and [w], which are in effect the consonantal forms of [i] and [u]): if we were to follow Hebrew usage in English we would write and print `cnsnts' for `consonants'. The letter aleph, adapted by the ancient Greeks to indicate the vowel alpha, which became our roman `a', is not a vowel but a consonant in Hebrew and other Semitic alphabets, representing a glottal stop (the sound between the two vowel sounds in the English `huh-uh', meaning `no'). Late in the history of the Hebrew alphabet, vowel `points', little dots and dashes below or above the letters to indicate the proper vowel, were added to many texts, often for the benefit of those who did not know the language very well, and today in Israel these `points' are added to words for very young children learning to read  up to the third grade or so. Languages are organized in many different ways, and the Semitic languages are so constituted that they are easy to read when words are written only with consonants. This way of writing only with consonants and semi-consonants (y as in `you', w) has led some linguists (Gelb 1963; Havelock 1963, p. 129) to call what other linguists call the Hebrew alphabet a syllabary, or perhaps an unvocalized or `reduced' syllabary. However, it appears somewhat awkward to think of the Hebrew letter beth (b) as a syllable when it in fact simply represents the phoneme [b], to which the reader has to add whatever vowel sound the word and context call for. Besides, when vowel points are used, they are added to the letters (above or below the line) just as vowels are added to our consonants. And

writing restructures consciousness

89

modern Israelis and Arabs, who agree on so little else, both generally agree that both are writing letters in an alphabet. For an understanding of the development of writing out of orality, it appears at least unobjectionable to think of the Semitic script simply as an alphabet of consonants (and semivowels) for which readers, as they read, simply and easily supply the appropriate vowels. When this is all said, however, about the Semitic alphabet, it does appear that the Greeks did something of major psychological importance when they developed the first alphabet complete with vowels. Havelock (1976) believes that this crucial, more nearly total transformation of the word from sound to sight gave ancient Greek culture its intellectual ascendancy over other ancient cultures. The reader of Semitic writing had to draw on non-textual as well as textual data: he had to know the language he was reading in order to know what vowels to supply between the consonants. Semitic writing was still very much immersed in the non-textual human lifeworld. The vocalic Greek alphabet was more remote from that world (as Plato's ideas were to be). It analyzed sound more abstractly into purely spatial components. It could be used to write or read words even from languages one did not know (allowing for some inaccuracies due to phonemic differences between languages). Little children could acquire the Greek alphabet when they were very young and their vocabulary limited. (It has just been noted that for Israeli schoolchildren to about the third grade vowel `points' have to be added to the ordinary consonantal Hebrew script.) The Greek alphabet was democratizing in the sense that it was easy for everyone to learn. It was also internationalizing in that it provided a way of processing even foreign tongues. This Greek achievement in abstractly analyzing the elusive world of sound into visual equivalents (not perfectly, of course, but in effect fully) both presaged and implemented their further analytic exploits. It appears that the structure of the Greek language, the fact that it was not based on a system like the Semitic that was hospitable to omission of vowels from writing, turned out to be a perhaps accidental but crucial intellectual advantage. Kerckhove (1981) has suggested that, more than other writing systems, the completely phonetic alphabet favors left-hemisphere activity in the brain, and thus on neurophysiological grounds fosters abstract, analytic thought.

90

orality and literacy

The reason why the alphabet was invented so late and why it was invented only once can be sensed if we reflect on the nature of sound. For the alphabet operates more directly on sound as sound than the other scripts, reducing sound directly to spatial equivalents, and in smaller, more analytic, more manageable units than a syllabary: instead of one symbol for the sound ba, you have two, b plus a. Sound, as has earlier been explained, exists only when it is going out of existence. I cannot have all of a word present at once: when I say `existence', by the time I get to the `-tence', the `exis-' is gone. The alphabet implies that matters are otherwise, that a word is a thing, not an event, that it is present all at once, and that it can be cut up into little pieces, which can even be written forwards and pronounced backwards: `p-a-r-t' can be pronounced `trap'. If you put the word `part' on a sound tape and reverse the tape, you do not get `trap', but a completely different sound, neither `part' nor `trap'. A picture, say, of a bird does not reduce sound to space, for it represents an object, not a word. It will be the equivalent of any number of words, depending on the language used to interpret it: oiseau, uccello, pjaro, Vogel, sae, tori, `bird'. All script represents words as in some way things, quiescent objects, immobile marks for assimilation by vision. Rebuses or phonograms, which occur irregularly in some pictographic writing, represent the sound of one word by the picture of another (the `sole' of a foot representing the `soul' as paired with body, in the fictitious example used above). But the rebus (phonogram), though it may represent several things, is still a picture of one of the things it represents. The alphabet, though it probably derives from pictograms, has lost all connection with things as things. It represents sound itself as a thing, transforming the evanescent world of sound to the quiescent, quasi-permanent world of space. The phonetic alphabet invented by ancient Semites and perfected by ancient Greeks, is by far the most adaptable of all writing systems in reducing sound to visible form. It is perhaps also the least aesthetic of all major writing systems: it can be beautifully designed, but never so exquisitely as Chinese characters. It is a democratizing script, easy for everybody to learn. Chinese character writing, like many other writing systems, is intrinsically litist: to master it thoroughly requires protracted leisure. The democratizing quality of the alphabet can be seen

writing restructures consciousness

91

in South Korea. In Korean books and newspapers the text is a mixture of alphabetically spelt words and hundreds of different Chinese characters. But all public signs are always written in the alphabet alone, which virtually everyone can read since it is completely mastered in the lower grades of elementary school, whereas the 1800 han, or Chinese characters, minimally needed besides the alphabet for reading most literature in Korean, are not commonly all mastered before the end of secondary school. Perhaps the most remarkable single achievement in the history of the alphabet was in Korea, where in AD 1443 King Sejong of the Yi Dynasty decreed that an alphabet should be devised for Korean. Up to that time Korean had been written only with Chinese characters, laboriously adapted to fit (and interact with) the vocabulary of Korean, a language not at all related to Chinese (though it has many Chinese loan words, mostly so Koreanized as to be incomprehensible to any Chinese). Thousands upon thousands of Koreans  all Koreans who could write  had spent or were spending the better part of their lives mastering the complicated Sino-Korean chirography. They were hardly likely to welcome a new writing system which would render their laboriously acquired skills obsolete. But the Yi Dynasty was powerful and Sejong's decree in the face of massive anticipated resistance suggests that he had comparably powerful ego structures. The accommodation of the alphabet to a given language has generally taken many years, or generations. Sejong's assembly of scholars had the Korean alphabet ready in three years, a masterful achievement, virtually perfect in its accommodation to Korean phonemics and aesthetically designed to produce an alphabetic script with something of the appearance of a text in Chinese characters. But the reception of this remarkable achievement was predictable. The alphabet was used only for unscholarly, practical, vulgarian purposes. `Serious' writers continued to use the Chinese character writing in which they had so laboriously trained themselves. Serious literature was litist and wanted to be known as litist. Only in the twentieth century, with the greater democratization of Korea, did the alphabet achieve its present (still less than total) ascendancy.

92

orality and literacy

THE ONSET OF LITERACY
When a fully formed script of any sort, alphabetic or other, first makes its way from outside into a particular society, it does so necessarily at first in restricted sectors and with varying effects and implications. Writing is often regarded at first as an instrument of secret and magic power (Goody 1968b, p. 236). Traces of this early attitude toward writing can still show etymologically: the Middle English `grammarye' or grammar, referring to book-learning, came to mean occult or magical lore, and through one Scottish dialectical form has emerged in our present English vocabulary as `glamor' (spell-casting power). `Glamor girls' are really grammar girls. The futhark or runic alphabet of medieval Northern Europe was commonly associated with magic. Scraps of writing are used as magic amulets (Goody 1968b, pp. 201 3), but they also can be valued simply because of the wonderful permanence they confer on words. The Nigerian novelist Chinua Achebe describes how in an Ibo village the one man who knew how to read hoarded in his house every bit of printed material that came his way  newspapers, cartons, receipts (Achebe 1961, pp. 1201). It all seemed too remarkable to throw away. Some societies of limited literacy have regarded writing as dangerous to the unwary reader, demanding a guru-like figure to mediate between reader and text (Goody and Watt 1968, p. 13). Literacy can be restricted to special groups such as the clergy (Tambiah 1968, pp. 113 14). Texts can be felt to have intrinsic religious value: illiterates profit from rubbing the book on their foreheads, or from whirling prayerwheels bearing texts they cannot read (Goody 1968a, pp. 1516). Tibetan monks used to sit on the banks of streams `printing pages of charms and formulas on the surface of the water with woodcut blocks' (Goody 1968a, p. 16, quoting R. B. Eckvall). The still flourishing `cargo cults' of some South Pacific islands are well known: illiterates or semiliterates think that the commercial papers  orders, bills of lading, receipts, and the like  that they know figure in shipping operations are magical instruments to make ships and cargo come in from across the sea, and they elaborate various rituals manipulating written texts in the hope that cargo will turn up for their own possession and use (Meggitt 1968, pp. 3009). In ancient Greek culture Havelock discovers a

writing restructures consciousness

93

general pattern of restricted literacy applicable to many other cultures: shortly after the introduction of writing a `craft literacy' develops (Havelock 1963; cf. Havelock and Herschell 1978). At this stage writing is a trade practiced by craftsmen, whom others hire to write a letter or document as they might hire a stone-mason to build a house, or a shipwright to build a boat. Such was the state of affairs in West African kingdoms, such as Mali, from the Middle Ages into the twentieth century (Wilks 1968; Goody 1968b). At such a craft-literacy stage, there is no need for an individual to know reading and writing any more than any other trade. Only around Plato's time in ancient Greece, more than three centuries after the introduction of the Greek alphabet, was this stage transcended when writing was finally diffused through the Greek population and interiorized enough to affect thought processes generally (Havelock 1963). The physical properties of early writing materials encouraged the continuance of scribal culture (see Clanchy 1979, pp. 88115, on `The technology of writing'). Instead of evenly surfaced machine-made paper and relatively durable ball-point pens, the early writer had more recalcitrant technological equipment. For writing surfaces, he had wet clay bricks, animal skins (parchment, vellum) scraped free of fat and hair, often smoothed with pumice and whitened with chalk, frequently reprocessed by scraping off an earlier text (palimpsests). Or he had the bark of trees, papyrus (better than most surfaces but still rough by high-technology standards), dried leaves or other vegetation, wax layered onto wooden tablets often hinged to form a diptych worn on a belt (these wax tablets were used for notes, the wax being smoothed over again for re-use), wooden rods (Clanchy 1979, p. 95) and other wooden and stone surfaces of various sorts. There were no corner stationery stores selling pads of paper. There was no paper. As inscribing tools the scribes had various kinds of styli, goose quills which had to be slit and sharpened over and over again with what we still call a `pen knife', brushes (particularly in East Asia), or various other instruments for incising surfaces and/or spreading inks or paints. Fluid inks were mixed in various ways and readied for use into hollow bovine horns (inkhorns) or in other acid resistant containers, or, commonly in East Asia, brushes were wetted and dabbed on dry ink blocks, as in watercolor painting.

94

orality and literacy

Special mechanical skills were required for working with such writing materials, and not all `writers' had such skills suitably developed for protracted composition. Paper made writing physically easier. But paper, manufactured in China probably by the second century BC and diffused by Arabs to the Middle East by the eighth century of the Christian era, was first manufactured in Europe only in the twelfth century. Longstanding oral mental habits of thinking through one's thoughts aloud encourage dictation, but so did the state of writing technology. In the physical act of writing, the medieval Englishman Orderic Vitalis says, `the whole body labors' (Clanchy 1979, p. 90). Through the Middle Ages in Europe authors often employed scribes. Composition in writing, working out one's thought pen-in-hand, particularly in briefer compositions, was, of course, practiced to some extent from antiquity, but it became widespread for literary and other prolonged composition at different times in different cultures. It was still rare in eleventh-century England, and, when it occurred, even this late, could be done in a psychological setting so oral that we find it hard to imagine. The eleventh-century Eadmer of St Albans says that, when he composed in writing, he felt he was dictating to himself (Clanchy 1979, p. 218). St Thomas Aquinas, who wrote his own manuscripts, organizes his Summa theologiae in quasi-oral format: each section or `question' begins with a recitation of objections against the position Thomas will take, then Thomas states his position, and finally answers the objections in order. Similarly, an early poet would write down a poem by imagining himself declaiming it to an audience. Few if any novelists today write a novel by imagining themselves declaiming it aloud, though they might be exquisitely aware of the sound effects of the words. High literacy fosters truly written composition, in which the author composes a text which is precisely a text, puts his or her words together on paper. This gives thought different contours from those of orally sustained thought. More will be said (that is, written) here later about the effects of literacy on thought processes.

writing restructures consciousness

95

FROM MEMORY TO WRITTEN RECORDS
Long after a culture has begun to use writing, it may still not give writing high ratings. A present-day literate usually assumes that written records have more force than spoken words as evidence of a long-past state of affairs, especially in court. Earlier cultures that knew literacy but had not so fully interiorized it, have often assumed quite the opposite. The amount of credence accorded to written records undoubtedly varied from culture to culture, but Clanchy's careful case history of the use of literacy for practical administrative purposes in eleventh- and twelfth-century England (1979) gives an informative sample of how much orality could linger in the presence of writing, even in an administrative milieu. In the period he studies, Clanchy finds that `documents did not immediately inspire trust' (Clanchy 1979, p. 230). People had to be persuaded that writing improved the old oral methods sufficiently to warrant all the expense and troublesome techniques it involved. Before the use of documents, collective oral testimony was commonly used to establish, for example, the age of feudal heirs. To settle a dispute in 1127 as to whether the customs dues at the port of Sandwich went to St Augustine's Abbey at Canterbury or to Christ Church, a jury was chosen consisting of twelve men from Dover and twelve from Sandwich, `mature, wise seniors of many years, having good testimony'. Each juror then swore that, as `I have received from my ancestors, and I have seen and heard from my youth', the tolls belong to Christ Church (Clanchy 1979, pp. 2323). They were publicly remembering what others before them had remembered. Witnesses were prima facie more credible than texts because they could be challenged and made to defend their statements, whereas texts could not (this, it will be recalled, was exactly one of Plato's objections to writing). Notarial methods of authenticating documents undertake to build authenticating mechanisms into written texts, but notarial methods developed late in literate cultures, and much later in England than in Italy (Clanchy 1979, pp. 2356). Written documents themselves were often authenticated not in writing but by symbolic objects (such as a knife, attached to the document by a parchment thong  Clanchy 1979, p. 24). Indeed symbolic objects alone could

96

orality and literacy

serve as instruments transferring property. In c. 1130, Thomas de Muschamps conveyed his estate of Hetherslaw to the monks at Durham by offering his sword on an altar (Clanchy 1979, p. 25). Even after the Domesday Book (10856) and the accompanying increase in written documentation, the story of the Earle Warrenne shows how the old oral state of mind still persisted: before the judges in quo warranto procedures under Edward I (reigned 12721306), the Earle Warrenne exhibited not a charter but `an ancient and rusty sword', protesting that his ancestors had come with William the Conqueror to take England by the sword and that he would defend his lands with the sword. Clanchy points out (1979, pp. 212) that the story is somewhat questionable because of certain inconsistencies, but notes also that its persistence attests to an earlier state of mind familiar with the witness value of symbolic gifts. Early charters conveying land in England were originally not even dated (1979, pp. 231, 23641), probably for a variety of reasons. Clanchy suggests that the most profound reason was probably that `dating required the scribe to express an opinion about his place in time' (1979, p. 238), which demanded that he choose a point of reference. What point? Was he to locate this document by reference to the creation of the world? To the Crucifixion? To the birth of Christ? Popes dated documents this way, from Christ's birth, but was it presumptuous to date a secular document as popes dated theirs? In high technology cultures today, everyone lives each day in a frame of abstract computed time enforced by millions of printed calendars, clocks, and watches. In twelfth-century England there were no clocks or watches or wall or desk calendars. Before writing was deeply interiorized by print, people did not feel themselves situated every moment of their lives in abstract computed time of any sort. It appears unlikely that most persons in medieval or even Renaissance western Europe would ordinarily have been aware of the number of the current calendar year  from the birth of Christ or any other point in the past. Why should they be? Indecision concerning what point to compute from attested the trivialities of the issue. In a culture with no newspapers or other currently dated material to impinge on consciousness, what would be the point for most people in knowing the current calendar year? The abstract calendar number

writing restructures consciousness

97

would relate to nothing in real life. Most persons did not know and never even tried to discover in what calendar year they had been born. Moreover, charters were undoubtedly assimilated somewhat to symbolic gifts, such as knives or swords. These were identifiable by their looks. And indeed, charters were quite regularly forged to make them look like what a court (however erroneously) felt a charter should look like (Clanchy 1979, p. 249, citing P. H. Sawyer). `Forgers', Clanchy points out, were not `occasional deviants on the peripheries of legal practice' but `experts entrenched at the centre of literary and intellectual culture in the twelfth century.' Of the 164 now extant charters of Edward the Confessor, 44 are certainly forged, only 64 certainly authentic, and the rest uncertainly one or the other. The verifiable errors resulting from the still radically oral economic and juridical procedures that Clanchy reports were minimal because the fuller past was mostly inaccessible to consciousness. `Remembered truth was . . . flexible and up to date' (Clanchy 1979, p. 233). As has been seen in instances from modern Nigeria and Ghana (Goody and Watt 1968, pp. 314), in an oral economy of thought, matters from the past without any sort of present relevance commonly dropped into oblivion. Customary law, trimmed of material no longer of use, was automatically always up to date and thus youthful  a fact which, paradoxically, makes customary law seem inevitable and thus very old (cf. Clanchy 1979, p. 233). Persons whose world view has been formed by high literacy need to remind themselves that in functionally oral cultures the past is not felt as an itemized terrain, peppered with verifiable and disputed `facts' or bits of information. It is the domain of the ancestors, a resonant source for renewing awareness of present existence, which itself is not an itemized terrain either. Orality knows no lists or charts or figures. Goody (1977, pp. 52111) has examined in detail the noetic significance of tables and lists, of which the calendar is one example. Writing makes such apparatus possible. Indeed, writing was in a sense invented largely to make something like lists: by far most of the earliest writing we know, that in the cuneiform script of the Sumerians beginning around 3500 BC, is account-keeping. Primary oral cultures commonly situate their equivalent of lists in narrative, as in the catalogue of the ships and captains in the Iliad (ii. 461879)  not an objective tally but

98

orality and literacy

an operational display in a story about a war. In the text of the Torah, which set down in writing thought forms still basically oral, the equivalent of geography (establishing the relationship of one place to another) is put into a formulary action narrative (Numbers 33:16 ff): `Setting out from the desert of Sinai, they camped at Kibroth-hattaavah. Setting out from Kibroth-hattaavah, they camped at Hazeroth. Setting out from Hazeroth, they camped at Rithmah . . .', and so on for many more verses. Even genealogies out of such orally framed tradition are in effect commonly narrative. Instead of a recitation of names, we find a sequence of `begats', of statements of what someone did: `Irad begat Mehajael, Mehajael begat Methusael, Methusael begat Lamech' (Genesis 4:18). This sort of aggregation derives partly from the oral drive to use formulas, partly from the oral mnemonic drive to exploit balance (recurrence of subject-predicate-object produces a swing which aids recall and which a mere sequence of names would lack), partly from the oral drive to redundancy (each person is mentioned twice, as begetter and begotten), and partly from the oral drive to narrate rather than simply to juxtapose (the persons are not immobilized as in a police line-up, but are doing something  namely, begetting). These biblical passages obviously are written records, but they come from an orally constituted sensibility and tradition. They are not felt as thing-like, but as reconstitutions of events in time. Orally presented sequences are always occurrences in time, impossible to `examine', because they are not presented visually but rather are utterances which are heard. In a primary oral culture or a culture with heavy oral residue, even genealogies are not `lists' of data but rather `memory of songs sung'. Texts are thing-like, immobilized in visual space, subject to what Goody calls `backward scanning' (1977, pp. 4950). Goody shows in detail how, when anthropologists display on a written or printed surface lists of various items found in oral myths (clans, regions of the earth, kinds of winds, and so on), they actually deform the mental world in which the myths have their own existence. The satisfaction that myths provide is essentially not `coherent' in a tabular way. Lists of the sort Goody discusses are of course useful if we are reflectively aware of the distortion they inevitably introduce. Visual presentation of verbalized material in space has its own particular economy, its own laws of motion and structure. Texts in various scripts

writing restructures consciousness

99

around the world are read variously from right to left, or left to right, or top to bottom, or all these ways at once as in boustrophedon writing, but never anywhere, so far as is known, from bottom to top. Texts assimilate utterance to the human body. They introduce a feeling for `headings' in accumulations of knowledge: `chapter' derives from the Latin caput, meaning head (as of the human body). Pages have not only `heads' but also `feet', for footnotes. References are given to what is `above' and `below' in a text when what is meant is several pages back or farther on. The significance of the vertical and the horizontal in texts deserves serious study. Kerckhove (1981) suggests that growth in lefthemisphere dominance governed the drift in early Greek writing from right-to-left movement, to boustrophedon movement (`ox-plowing' pattern, one line going right, then a turn around a corner into the next line going left, the letters inverted according to the direction of the line), to stoichedon style (vertical lines), and finally to definitive leftto-right movement on a horizontal line. All this is quite a different world of order from anything in the oral sensibility, which has no way of operating with `headings' or verbal linearity. Across the world the alphabet, the ruthlessly efficient reducer of sound to space, is pressed into direct service for setting up the new space-defined sequences: items are marked a, b, c, and so on to indicate their sequences, and even poems in the early days of literacy are composed with the first letter of the first word of successive lines following the order of the alphabet. The alphabet as a simple sequence of letters is a major bridge between oral mnemonic and literate mnemonics: generally the sequence of the letters of the alphabet is memorized orally and then used for largely visual retrieval of materials, as in indexes. Charts, which range elements of thought not simply in one line of rank but simultaneously in horizontal and various cross-cross orders, represent a frame of thought even farther removed than lists are from the oral noetic processes which such charts are supposed to represent. The extensive use of lists and particularly of charts so commonplace in our high-technology cultures is a result not simply of writing, but of the deep interiorization of print (Ong 1958b, pp. 30718, and passim), which implements the use of fixed diagrammatic word-charts and other informational uses of neutral space far beyond anything feasible in any writing culture.

100 orality and literacy SOME DYNAMICS OF TEXTUALITY
The condition of words in a text is quite different from their condition in spoken discourse. Although they refer to sounds and are meaningless unless they can be related  externally or in the imagination  to the sounds or, more precisely, the phonemes they encode, written words are isolated from the fuller context in which spoken words come into being. The word in its natural, oral habitat is a part of a real, existential present. Spoken utterance is addressed by a real, living person to another real, living person or real, living persons, at a specific time in a real setting which includes always much more than mere words. Spoken words are always modifications of a total situation which is more than verbal. They never occur alone, in a context simply of words. Yet words are alone in a text. Moreover, in composing a text, in `writing' something, the one producing the written utterance is also alone. Writing is a solipsistic operation. I am writing a book which I hope will be read by hundreds of thousands of people, so I must be isolated from everyone. While writing the present book, I have left word that I am `out' for hours and days  so that no one, including persons who will presumably read the book, can interrupt my solitude. In a text even the words that are there lack their full phonetic qualities. In oral speech, a word must have one or another intonation or tone of voice  lively, excited, quiet, incensed, resigned, or whatever. It is impossible to speak a word orally without any intonation. In a text punctuation can signal tone minimally: a question mark or a comma, for example, generally calls for the voice to be raised a bit. Literate tradition, adopted and adapted by skilled critics, can also supply some extratextual clues for intonations, but not complete ones. Actors spend hours determining how actually to utter the words in the text before them. A given passage might be delivered by one actor in a shout, by another in a whisper. Extratextual context is missing not only for readers but also for the writer. Lack of verifiable context is what makes writing normally so much more agonizing an activity than oral presentation to a real audience. `The writer's audience is always a fiction' (Ong 1977, pp. 5381). The writer must set up a role in which absent and often

writing restructures consciousness

101

unknown readers can cast themselves. Even in writing to a close friend I have to fictionalize a mood for him, to which he is expected to conform. The reader must also fictionalize the writer. When my friend reads my letter, I may be in an entirely different frame of mind from when I wrote it. Indeed, I may very well be dead. For a text to convey its message, it does not matter whether the author is dead or alive. Most books extant today were written by persons now dead. Spoken utterance comes only from the living. Even in a personal diary addressed to myself I must fictionalize the addressee. Indeed, the diary demands, in a way, the maximum fictionalizing of the utterer and the addressee. Writing is always a kind of imitation talking, and in a diary I therefore am pretending that I am talking to myself. But I never really talk this way to myself. Nor could I without writing or indeed without print. The personal diary is a very late literary form, in effect unknown until the seventeenth century (Boerner 1969). The kind of verbalized solipsistic reveries it implies are a product of consciousness as shaped by print culture. And for which self am I writing? Myself today? As I think I will be ten years from now? As I hope I will be? For myself as I imagine myself or hope others may imagine me? Questions such as this can and do fill diary writers with anxieties and often enough lead to discontinuation of diaries. The diarist can no longer live with his or her fiction. The ways in which readers are fictionalized is the underside of literary history, of which the topside is the history of genres and the handling of character and plot. Early writing provides the reader with conspicuous help for situating himself imaginatively. It presents philosophical material in dialogues, such as those of Plato's Socrates, which the reader can imagine himself overhearing. Or episodes are to be imagined as told to a live audience on successive days. Later, in the Middle Ages, writing will present philosophical and theological texts in objection-and-response form, so that the reader can imagine an oral disputation. Boccaccio and Chaucer will provide the reader with fictional groups of men and women telling stories to one another, that is, a `frame story', so that the reader can pretend to be one of the listening company. But who is talking to whom in Pride and Prejudice or in Le Rouge et le noir, or in Adam Bede? Nineteenth-century novelists self-consciously intone, `dear reader', over and over again to remind themselves that

102 orality and literacy
they are not telling a story but writing one in which both author and reader are having difficulty situating themselves. The psychodynamics of writing matured very slowly in narrative. And what is the reader supposed to make himself out to be in Finnegans Wake? Only a reader. But of a special fictional sort. Most readers of English cannot or will not make themselves into the special kind of reader Joyce demands. Some take courses in universities to learn how to fictionalize themselves  la Joyce. Although Joyce's text is very oral in the sense that it reads well aloud, the voice and its hearer do not fit into any imaginable real-life setting, but only the imaginative setting of Finnegans Wake, which is imaginable only because of the writing and print that has gone before it. Finnegans Wake was composed in writing, but for print: with its idiosyncratic spelling and usages, it would be virtually impossible to multiply it accurately in handwritten copies. There is no mimesis here in Aristotle's sense, except ironically. Writing is indeed the seedbed of irony, and the longer the writing (and print) tradition endures, the heavier the ironic growth becomes (Ong 1977, pp. 272302).

DISTANCE, PRECISION, GRAPHOLECTS AND MAGNAVOCABULARIES
The distancing which writing effects develops a new kind of precision in verbalization by removing it from the rich but chaotic existential context of much oral utterance. Oral performances can be impressive in their magniloquence and communal wisdom, whether they are lengthy, as in formal narrative, or brief and apophthegmatic, as in proverbs. Yet wisdom has to do with a total and relatively infrangible social context. Orally managed language and thought are not noted for analytic precision. Of course, all language and thought are to some degree analytic: they break down the dense continuum of experience, William James's `big, blooming, buzzing confusion', into more or less separate parts, meaningful segments. But written words sharpen analysis, for the individual words are called on to do more. To make yourself clear without gesture, without facial expression, without intonation, without a real hearer, you have to foresee circumspectly all possible meanings a

writing restructures consciousness

103

statement may have for any possible reader in any possible situation, and you have to make your language work so as to come clear all by itself, with no existential context. The need for this exquisite circumspection makes writing the agonizing work it commonly is. What Goody (1977, p. 128) calls `backward scanning' makes it possible in writing to eliminate inconsistencies (Goody 1977, pp. 4950), to choose between words with a reflective selectivity that invests thought and words with new discriminatory powers. In an oral culture, the flow of words, the corresponding flood of thought, the copia advocated in Europe by rhetoricians from classical antiquity through the Renaissance, tends to manage discrepancies by glossing them over  the etymology here is telling, glossa, tongue, by `tonguing' them over. With writing, words once `uttered', outered, put down on the surface, can be eliminated, erased, changed. There is no equivalent for this in an oral performance, no way to erase a spoken word: corrections do not remove an infelicity or an error, they merely supplement it with denial and patchwork. The bricolage or patchwork that Lvi-Strauss (1966, 1970) finds characteristic of `primitive' or `savage' thought patterns can be seen here to be due to the oral noetic situation. Corrections in oral performance tend to be counterproductive, to render the speaker unconvincing. So you keep them to a minimum or avoid them altogether. In writing, corrections can be tremendously productive, for how can the reader know they have even been made? Of course, once the chirographically initiated feel for precision and analytic exactitude is interiorized, it can feed back into speech, and does. Although Plato's thought is couched in dialogue form, its exquisite precision is due to the effects of writing on the noetic processes, for the dialogues are in fact written texts. Through a chirographically managed text couched in dialogue form, they move dialectically toward the analytic clarification of issues which Socrates and Plato had inherited in more `totalized', non-analytic, narratized, oral form. In The Greek Concept of Justice: From Its Shadow in Homer to Its Substance in Plato (1978a), Havelock has treated the movement which Plato's work brought to a head. Nothing of Plato's analytic targeting on an abstract concept of justice is to be found in any known purely oral cultures. Similarly, the deadly targeting on issues and on adversaries' weaknesses in Cicero's orations is the work of a literate mind, although we know

104 orality and literacy
that Cicero did not compose his orations in script before he gave them but wrote down afterwards the texts that we now have (Ong 1967b, pp. 567). The exquisitely analytic oral disputations in medieval universities and in later scholastic tradition into the present century (Ong 1981, pp. 1378) were the work of minds honed by writing texts and by reading and commenting on texts, orally and in writing. By separating the knower from the known (Havelock 1963), writing makes possible increasingly articulate introspectivity, opening the psyche as never before not only to the external objective world quite distinct from itself but also to the interior self against whom the objective world is set. Writing makes possible the great introspective religious traditions such as Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. All these have sacred texts. The ancient Greeks and Romans knew writing and used it, particularly the Greeks, to elaborate philosophical and scientific knowledge. But they developed no sacred texts comparable to the Vedas or the Bible or the Koran, and their religion failed to establish itself in the recesses of the psyche which writing had opened for them. It became only a genteel, archaic literary resource for writers such as Ovid and a framework of external observances, lacking urgent personal meaning. Writing develops codes in a language different from oral codes in the same language. Basil Bernstein (1974, pp. 1345, 176, 181, 197 8) distinguishes the `restricted linguistic code' or `public language' of the lower-class English dialects in Britain and the `elaborated linguistic code' or `private language' of the middle- and upper-class dialects. Walt Wolfram (1972) had earlier noted distinctions like Bernstein's between Black American English and standard American English. The restricted linguistic code can be at least as expressive and precise as the elaborated code in contexts which are familiar and shared by speaker and hearer. For dealing with the unfamiliar expressively and precisely, however, the restricted linguistic code will not do; an elaborated linguistic code is absolutely needed. The restricted linguistic code is evidently largely oral in origin and use and, like oral thought and expression generally, operates contextually, close to the human lifeworld: the group whom Bernstein found using this code were messenger boys with no grammar school education. Their expression has a formula-like quality and strings thoughts together not in careful

writing restructures consciousness

105

subordination but `like beads on a frame' (1974, p. 134)  recognizably the formulaic and aggregative mode of oral culture. The elaborated code is one which is formed with the necessary aid of writing, and, for full elaboration, of print. The group Bernstein found using this code were from the six major public schools that provided the most intensive education in reading and writing in Britain (1974, p. 83). Bernstein's `restricted' and `elaborated' linguistic codes could be relabeled `oralbased' and `text-based' codes respectively. Olson (1977) has shown how orality relegates meaning largely to context whereas writing concentrates meaning in language itself. Writing and print develop special kinds of dialects. Most languages have never been committed to writing at all, as has been seen (p. 7 above). But certain languages, or more properly dialects, have invested massively in writing. Often, as in England or Germany or Italy, where a cluster of dialects is found, one regional dialectic has developed chirographically beyond all others, for economic, political, religious, or other reasons, and has eventually become a national language. In England this happened to the upper-class London English dialect, in Germany, to Hochdeutsch (the German of the highlands to the south), in Italy to Tuscan. While it is true that these were all at root regional and/ or class dialects, their status as chirographically controlled national languages has made them different kinds ofdialects or language from those which are not written on a large scale. As Guxman has pointed out (1970, pp. 7736), a national written language has had to be isolated from its original dialect base, has discarded certain dialectal forms, has developed various layers of vocabulary from sources not dialectal at all, and has developed also certain syntactical peculiarities. This kind of established written language Haugen (1966, pp. 5071) has aptly styled a `grapholect'. A modern grapholect such as `English', to use the simple term which is commonly used to refer to this grapholect, has been worked over for centuries, first and most intensively, it seems, by the chancery of Henry V (Richardson 1980), then by normative theorists, grammarians, lexicographers, and others. It has been recorded massively in writing and print and now on computers so that those competent in the grapholect today can establish easy contact not only with millions of other persons but also with the thought of centuries past, for the

106 orality and literacy
other dialects of English as well as thousands of foreign languages are interpreted in the grapholect. In this sense, the grapholect includes all the other dialects: it explains them as they cannot explain themselves. The grapholect bears the marks of the millions of minds which have used it to share their consciousnesses with one another. Into it has been hammered a massive vocabulary of an order of magnitude impossible for an oral tongue. Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1971) states in its Preface that it could have included `many times' more than the 450,000 words it does include. Assuming that `many times' must mean at least three times, and rounding out the figures, we can understand that the editors have on hand a record of some million and a half words used in print in English. Oral languages and oral dialects can get along with a small fraction of this number. The lexical richness of grapholects begins with writing, but its fullness is due to print. For the resources of a modern grapholect are available largely through dictionaries. There are limited word lists of various sorts from very early in the history of writing (Goody 1977, pp. 74111), but until print is well established there are no dictionaries that undertake generalized comprehensive accounts of the words in use in any language. It is easy to understand why this is so if you think of what it would mean to make even a few dozen relatively accurate handwritten copies of Webster's Third or even of the much smaller Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. Dictionaries such as these are light-years away from the world of oral cultures. Nothing illustrates more strikingly how it is that writing and print alter states of consciousness. Where grapholects exist, `correct' grammar and usage are popularly interpreted as the grammar and usage of the grapholect itself to the exclusion of the grammar and usage of other dialects. The sensory bases of the very concept of order are largely visual (Ong 1967b, pp. 108, 1367), and the fact that the grapholect is written or, a fortiori, printed encourages attributing to it a special normative power for keeping language in order. But when other dialects of a given language besides the grapholect vary from the grammar of the grapholect, they are not ungrammatical: they are simply using a different grammar, for language is structure, and it is impossible to use language without a grammar. In the light of this fact, linguists today commonly make the point that all dialects are equal in the sense that none has a grammar

writing restructures consciousness

107

intrinsically more `correct' than that of others. But Hirsch (1977, pp. 4350) makes the further point that in a profound sense no other dialect, for example, in English or German or Italian, has anything remotely like the resources of the grapholect. It is bad pedagogy to insist that because there is nothing `wrong' with other dialects, it makes no difference whether or not speakers of another dialect learn the grapholect, which has resources of a totally different order of magnitude.

INTERACTIONS: RHETORIC AND THE PLACES
Two special major developments in the West derive from and affect the interaction of writing and orality. These are academic rhetoric and Learned Latin. In his Volume III of the Oxford History of English Literature, C. S. Lewis observed that `rhetoric is the greatest barrier between us and our ancestors' (1954, p. 60). Lewis honors the magnitude of the subject by refusing to treat it, despite its overwhelming relevance for the culture of all ages at least up to the Age of Romanticism (Ong 1971, pp. 122, 25583). The study of rhetoric dominant in all western cultures until that time had begun as the core of ancient Greek education and culture. In ancient Greece, the study of `philosophy', represented by Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, for all its subsequent fecundity, was a relatively minor element in the total Greek culture, never competitive with rhetoric either in the number of its practitioners or in its immediate social effects (Marrou 1956, pp. 194205), as Socrates' unhappy fate suggests. Rhetoric was at root the art of public speaking, of oral address, for persuasion (forensic and deliberative rhetoric) or exposition (epideictic rhetoric). The Greek rhetor is from the same root as the Latin orator and means a public speaker. In the perspectives worked out by Havelock (1963) it would appear obvious that in a very deep sense the rhetorical tradition represented the old oral world and the philosophical tradition the new chirographic structures of thought. Like Plato, C. S. Lewis was in effect unwittingly turning his back on the old oral world. Over the centuries, until the Age of Romanticism (when the thrust of rhetoric was diverted, definitively if not totally, from oral

108 orality and literacy
performance to writing), explicit or even implicit commitment to the formal study and formal practice of rhetoric is an index of the amount of residual primary orality in a given culture (Ong 1971, pp. 23103). Homeric and the pre-Homeric Greeks, like oral peoples generally, practiced public speaking with great skill long before their skills were reduced to an `art', that is, to a body of sequentially organized, scientific principles which explained and abetted what verbal persuasion consisted in. Such an `art' is presented in Aristotle's Art of Rhetoric (techne  rhe torike ). Oral cultures, as has been seen, can have no `arts' of this scientifically organized sort. No one could or can simply recite extempore a treatise such as Aristotle's Art of Rhetoric, as someone in an oral culture would have to do if this sort of understanding were to be implemented. Lengthy oral productions follow more agglomerative, less analytic, patterns. The `art' of rhetoric, though concerned with oral speech, was, like other `arts', the product of writing. Persons from a high-technology culture who become aware of the vast literature of the past dealing with rhetoric, from classical antiquity through the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, and on into the Age of the Enlightenment (e.g. Kennedy 1980; Murphy 1974; Howell 1956, 1971), of the universal and obsessive interest in the subject through the ages and the amount of time spent studying it, of its vast and intricate terminology for classifying hundreds of figures of speech in Greek and Latin  antinomasia or pronominatio, paradiastole or distinctio, anticategoria or accusatio concertativa, and so on and on and on  (Lanham 1968; Sonnino 1968) are likely to react with, `What a waste of time!' But for its first discoverers or inventors, the Sophists of fifth-century Greece, rhetoric was a marvelous thing. It provided a rationale for what was dearest to their hearts, effective and often showy oral performance, something which had been a distinctively human part of human existence for ages but which, before writing, could never have been so reflectively prepared for or accounted for. Rhetoric retained much of the old oral feeling for thought and expression as basically agonistic and formulaic. This shows clearly in rhetorical teaching about the `places' (Ong 1967b, pp. 5687; 1971, pp. 14787; Howell 1956, Index). With its agonistic heritage, rhetorical teaching assumed that the aim of more or less all discourse was to prove or disprove a point, against some opposition. Developing a

writing restructures consciousness

109

subject was thought of as a process of `invention', that is, of finding in the store of arguments that others had always exploited those arguments which were applicable to your case. These arguments were considered to be lodged or `seated' (Quintilian's term) in the `places' (topoi in Greek, loci in Latin), and were often called the loci communes or commonplaces when they were thought of as providing arguments common to any and all subject matter. From at least the time of Quintilian, loci communes was taken in two different senses. First, it referred to the `seats' of arguments, considered as abstract `headings' in today's parlance, such as definition, cause, effect, opposities, likenesses, and so on (the assortment varied in length from one author to another). Wanting to develop a `proof '  we should say simply to develop a line of thought  on any subject, such as loyalty, evil, the guilt of an accused criminal, friendship, war, or whatever, one could always find something to say by defining, looking to causes, effects, opposites, and all the rest. These headings can be styled the `analytic commonplaces'. Secondly, loci communes or commonplaces referred to collections of sayings (in effect, formulas) on various topics  such as loyalty, decadence, friendship, or whatever  that could be worked into one's own speech-making or writing. In this sense the loci communes can be styled `cumulative commonplaces'. Both the analytic and the cumulative commonplaces, it is clear, kept alive the old oral feeling for thought and expression essentially made up of formulaic or otherwise fixed materials inherited from the past. To say this is not to explicate the whole of the complex doctrine, which itself was integral to the massive art of rhetoric. Rhetoric of course is essentially antithetical (Durand 1960, pp. 451, 4539), for the orator speaks in the face of at least implied adversaries. Oratory has deep agonistic roots (Ong 1967b, pp. 192222; 1981, pp. 11948). The development of the vast rhetorical tradition was distinctive of the West and was related, whether as cause or effect or both, to the tendency among the Greeks and their cultural epigoni to maximize oppositions, in the mental as in the extramental world: this by contrast with Indians and Chinese, who programmatically minimized them (Lloyd 1966; Oliver 1971). From Greek antiquity on, the dominance of rhetoric in the academic background produced throughout the literate world an impression,

110 orality and literacy
real if often vague, that oratory was the paradigm of all verbal expression, and kept the agonistic pitch of discourse exceedingly high by present-day standards. Poetry itself was often assimilated to epideictic oratory, and was considered to be concerned basically with praise or blame (as much oral, and even written, poetry is even today). Into the nineteenth century most literary style throughout the West was formed by academic rhetoric, in one way or another, with one notable exception: the literary style of female authors. Of the females who became published writers, as many did from the 1600s on, almost none had any such training. In medieval times and after, the education of girls was often intensive and produced effective managers of households, of sometimes fifty to eighty persons, which were often sizable businesses (Markham 1675, The English House-Wife), but this education was not acquired in academic institutions, which taught rhetoric and all other subjects in Latin. When they began to enter schools in some numbers during the seventeenth century, girls entered not the mainline Latin schools but the newer vernacular schools. These were practically oriented, for commerce and domestic affairs, whereas the older schools with Latin-based instruction were for those aspiring to be clergy, lawyers, physicians, diplomats, and other public servants. Women writers were no doubt influenced by works that they had read emanating from the Latin-based, academic, rhetorical tradition, but they themselves normally expressed themselves in a different, far less oratorical voice, which had a great deal to do with the rise of the novel.

INTERACTIONS: LEARNED LANGUAGES
The second massive development in the West affecting the interaction of writing and orality was Learned Latin. Learned Latin was a direct result of writing. Between about AD 550 and 700 the Latin spoken as a vernacular in various parts of Europe had evolved into various early forms of Italian, Spanish, Catalan, French, and the other Romance languages. By AD 700, speakers of these offshoots of Latin could no longer understand the old written Latin, intelligible perhaps to some of their greatgrandparents. Their spoken language had moved too far away from its origins. But schooling, and with it most official discourse of Church or state, continued in Latin. There was really no alternative.

writing restructures consciousness

111

Europe was a morass of hundreds of languages and dialects, most of them never written to this day. Tribes speaking countless Germanic and Slavic dialects, and even more exotic, non-Indo-European languages such as Magyar and Finnish and Turkish, were moving into western Europe. There was no way to translate the works, literary, scientific, philosophical, medical or theological, taught in schools and universities, into the swarming, oral vernaculars which often had different, mutually unintelligible forms among populations perhaps only fifty miles apart. Until one or another dialect for economic or other reasons became dominant enough to gain adherents even from other dialectical regions (as the East Midland dialect did in England or Hochdeutsch in Germany), the only practical policy was to teach Latin to the limited numbers of boys going to school. Once a mother tongue, Latin thus became a school language only, spoken not only in the classroom but also, in principle if far from always in fact, everywhere else on the school premises. By prescription of school statutes Latin had become Learned Latin, a language completely controlled by writing, whereas the new Romance vernaculars had developed out of Latin as languages had always developed, orally. Latin had undergone a sound-sight split. Because of its base in academia, which was totally male  with exceptions so utterly rare as to be quite negligible  Learned Latin had another feature in common with rhetoric besides its classical provenance. For well over a thousand years, it was sex-linked, a language written and spoken only by males, learned outside the home in a tribal setting which was in effect a male puberty rite setting, complete with physical punishment and other kinds of deliberately imposed hardships (Ong 1971, pp. 11341; 1981, pp. 11948). It had no direct connection with anyone's unconscious of the sort that mother tongues, learned in infancy, always have. Learned Latin related to orality and literacy, however, in paradoxical ways. On the one hand, as just noted, it was a chirographically controlled language. Of the millions who spoke it for the next 1400 years, every one was able also to write it. There were no purely oral users. But chirographic control of Learned Latin did not preclude its alliance with orality. Paradoxically, the textuality that kept Latin rooted in classical antiquity thereby kept it rooted also in orality, for the classical ideal of education had been to produce not the effective writer but the rhetor,

112 orality and literacy
the orator, the public speaker. The grammar of Learned Latin came from this old oral world. So did its basic vocabulary, although, like all languages actually in use, it incorporated thousands of new words over the centuries. Devoid of baby-talk, insulated from the earliest life of childhood where language has its deepest psychic roots, a first language to none of its users, pronounced across Europe in often mutually unintelligible ways but always written the same way, Learned Latin was a striking exemplification of the power of writing for isolating discourse and of the unparalleled productivity of such isolation. Writing, as has earlier been seen, serves to separate and distance the knower and the known and thus to establish objectivity. It has been suggested (Ong 1977, pp. 249) that Learned Latin effects even greater objectivity by establishing knowledge in a medium insulated from the emotion-charged depths of one's mother tongue, thus reducing interference from the human lifeworld and making possible the exquisitely abstract world of medieval scholasticism and of the new mathematical modern science which followed on the scholastic experience. Without Learned Latin, it appears that modern science would have got under way with greater difficulty, if it had got under way at all. Modern science grew in Latin soil, for philosophers and scientists through the time of Sir Isaac Newton commonly both wrote and did their abstract thinking in Latin. Interaction between such a chirographically controlled language as Learned Latin and the various vernaculars (mother tongues) is still far from being completely understood. There is no way simply to `translate' a language such as Learned Latin into languages like the vernaculars. Translation was transformation. Interaction produced all sorts of special results. Buml (1980, p. 264) has called attention, for example, to some of the effects when metaphors from a consciously metaphorical Latin were shifted into less metaphoricized mother tongues. During this period, other chirographically controlled, sexlinked male languages developed in Europe and Asia where sizable literate populations wanted to share a common intellectual heritage. Pretty much coeval with Learned Latin were Rabbinic Hebrew, Classical Arabic, Sanskrit, and Classical Chinese, with Byzantine Greek a sixth, much less definitively learned language, for vernacular Greek kept close contact with it (Ong 1977, pp. 2834). These languages were all no

writing restructures consciousness

113

longer in use as mother tongues (that is, in the straightforward sense, not used by mothers in raising children). They were never first languages for any individual, were controlled exclusively by writing, were spoken by males only (with negligible exceptions, though perhaps with more exceptions for Classical Chinese than for the others), and were spoken only by those who could write them and who, indeed, had learned them initially by the use of writing. Such languages are no more, and it is difficult today to sense their earlier power. All languages used for learned discourse today are also mother tongues (or, in the case of Arabic, are more and more assimilating to themselves mother tongues). Nothing shows more convincingly than this disappearance of chirographically controlled language how writing is losing its earlier power monopoly (though not its importance) in today's world.

TENACIOUSNESS OF ORALITY
As the paradoxical relationships of orality and literacy in rhetoric and Learned Latin suggest, the transition from orality to literacy was slow (Ong 1967b, pp. 5387; 1971, pp. 2348). The Middle Ages used texts far more than ancient Greece and Rome, teachers lectured on texts in the universities, and yet never tested knowledge or intellectual prowess by writing, but always by oral dispute  a practice continued in diminishing ways into the nineteenth century and today still surviving vestigially in the defense of the doctoral dissertation in the fewer and fewer places where this is practiced. Though Renaissance humanism invented modern textual scholarship and presided over the development of letterpress printing, it also harked back to antiquity and thereby gave new life to orality. English style in the Tudor period (Ong 1971, pp. 2347) and even much later carried heavy oral residue in its use of epithets, balance, antithesis, formulary structures, and commonplace materials. And so with western European literary styles generally. In western classical antiquity, it was taken for granted that a written text of any worth was meant to be and deserved to be read aloud, and the practice of reading texts aloud continued, quite commonly with many variations, through the nineteenth century (Balogh 1926). This practice strongly influenced literary style from antiquity until rather recent times (Balogh 1926; Crosby 1936; Nelson 19767; Ahern

114 orality and literacy
1982). Still yearning for the old orality, the nineteenth century developed `elocution' contests, which tried to repristinate printed texts, using careful artistry to memorize the texts verbatim and recite them so that they would sound like extempore oral productions (Howell 1971, pp. 144256). Dickens read selections from his novels on the orator's platform. The famous McGuffey's Readers, published in the United States in some 120 million copies between 1836 and 1920, were designed as remedial readers to improve not the reading for comprehension which we idealize today, but oral, declamatory reading. The McGuffey's specialized in passages from `sound-conscious' literature concerned with great heroes (`heavy' oral characters). They provided endless oral pronunciation and breathing drills (Lynn 1973, pp. 16, 20). Rhetoric itself gradually but inevitably migrated from the oral to the chirographic world. From classical antiquity the verbal skills learned in rhetoric were put to use not only in oratory but also in writing. By the sixteenth century rhetoric textbooks were commonly omitting from the traditional five parts of rhetoric (invention, arrangement, style, memory and delivery) the fourth part, memory, which was not applicable to writing. They were also minimizing the last part, delivery (Howell 1956, pp. 14672, 270, et passim). By and large, they made these changes with specious explanations or no explanation at all. Today, when curricula list rhetoric as a subject, it usually means simply the study of how to write effectively. But no one ever consciously launched a program to give this new direction to rhetoric: the `art' simply followed the drift of consciousness away from an oral to a writing economy. The drift was completed before it was noticed that anything was happening. Once it was completed, rhetoric was no longer the allpervasive subject it had once been: education could no longer be described as fundamentally rhetorical as it could be in past ages. The three Rs  reading, 'riting, and 'rithmetic  representing an essentially nonrhetorical, bookish, commercial and domestic education, gradually took over from the traditional orally grounded, heroic, agonistic education that had generally prepared young men in the past for teaching and professional, ecclesiastical, or political public service. In the process, as rhetoric and Latin went out, women entered more and more into academia, which also became more and more commercially oriented (Ong 1967b, pp. 24155).

5
PRINT, SPACE AND CLOSURE
HEARING-DOMINANCE YIELDS TO SIGHT-DOMINANCE
Although this book attends chiefly to oral culture and to the changes in thought and expression introduced by writing, it must give some brief attention to print, for print both reinforces and transforms the effects of writing on thought and expression. Since the shift from oral to written speech is essentially a shift from sound to visual space, here the effects of print on the use of visual space can be the central, though not the only, focus of attention. This focus brings out not only the relationship between print and writing, but also the relationship of print to the orality still residual in writing and early print culture. Moreover, while all the effects of print do not reduce to its effects on the use of visual space, many of the other effects do relate to this use in various ways. In a work of this scope there is no way even to enumerate all the effects of print. Even a cursory glance at Elizabeth Eisenstein's two volumes, The Printing Press as an Agent of Change (1979), makes abundantly evident how diversified and vast the particular effects of print have been. Eisenstein spells out in detail how print made the Italian Renaissance a permanent European Renaissance, how it implemented the Protestant Reformation and reoriented Catholic religious practice, how it affected the development of modern capitalism, implemented

116 orality and literacy
western European exploration of the globe, changed family life and politics, diffused knowledge as never before, made universal literacy a serious objective, made possible the rise of modern sciences, and otherwise altered social and intellectual life. In The Gutenberg Galaxy (1962) and Understanding Media (1964) Marshall McLuhan has called attention to many of the subtler ways print has affected consciousness, as George Steiner has also done in Language and Silence (1967) and as I have undertaken to do elsewhere (Ong 1958b; 1967b; 1971; 1977). These subtler effects of print on consciousness, rather than readily observable social effects, concern us particularly here. For thousands of years human beings have been printing designs from variously carved surfaces, and since the seventh or eighth century Chinese, Koreans and Japanese have been printing verbal texts, at first from wood blocks engraved in relief (Carter 1955). But the crucial development in the global history of printing was the invention of alphabetic letterpress print in fifteenth-century Europe. Alphabetic writing had broken the word up into spatial equivalents of phonemic units (in principle, though the letters never quite worked out as totally phonemic indicators). But the letters used in writing do not exist before the text in which they occur. With alphabetic letterpress print it is otherwise. Words are made out of units (types) which pre-exist as units before the words which they will constitute. Print suggests that words are things far more than writing ever did. Like the alphabet, alphabetic letterpress print was a nonce invention (Ong 1967b, and references there cited). The Chinese had had movable type, but no alphabet, only characters, basically pictographic. Before the mid-1400s the Koreans and Uigur Turks had both the alphabet and movable type, but the movable types bore not separate letters but whole words. Alphabet letterpress printing, in which each letter was cast on a separate piece of metal, or type, marked a psychological breakthrough of the first order. It embedded the word itself deeply in the manufacturing process and made it into a kind of commodity. The first assembly line, a technique of manufacture which in a series of set steps produces identical complex objects made up of replaceable parts, was not one which produced stoves or shoes or weaponry but one which produced the printed book. In the late 1700s, the industrial revolution applied to other manufacturing the replaceable-part

print, space and closure

117

techniques which printers had worked with for three hundred years. Despite the assumptions of many semiotic structuralists, it was print, not writing, that effectively reified the word, and, with it, noetic activity (Ong 1958b, pp. 30618). Hearing rather than sight had dominated the older noetic world in significant ways, even long after writing was deeply interiorized. Manuscript culture in the West remained always marginally oral. Ambrose of Milan caught the earlier mood in his Commentary on Luke (iv. 5): `Sight is often deceived, hearing serves as guarantee.' In the West through the Renaissance, the oration was the most taught of all verbal productions and remained implicitly the basic paradigm for all discourse, written as well as oral. Written material was subsidiary to hearing in ways which strike us today as bizarre. Writing served largely to recycle knowledge back into the oral world, as in medieval university disputations, in the reading of literary and other texts to groups (Crosby 1936; Ahern 1981; Nelson 19767), and in reading aloud even when reading to oneself. At least as late as the twelfth century in England, checking even written financial accounts was still done aurally, by having them read aloud. Clanchy (1979, pp. 215, 183) describes the practice and draws attention to the fact that it still registers in our vocabulary: even today, we speak of `auditing', that is, `hearing' account books, though what an accountant actually does today is examine them by sight. Earlier, residually oral folk could understand even figures better by listening than by looking. Manuscript cultures remained largely oral-aural even in retrieval of material preserved in texts. Manuscripts were not easy to read, by later typographic standards, and what readers found in manuscripts they tended to commit at least somewhat to memory. Relocating material in a manuscript was not always easy. Memorization was encouraged and facilitated also by the fact that in highly oral manuscript cultures, the verbalization one encountered even in written texts often continued the oral mnemonic patterning that made for ready recall. Moreover, readers commonly vocalized, read slowly aloud or sotto voce, even when reading alone, and this also helped fix matter in the memory. Well after printing was developed, auditory processing continued for some time to dominate the visible, printed text, though it was eventually eroded away by print. Auditory dominance can be seen

118 orality and literacy
strikingly in such things as early printed title pages, which often seem to us crazily erratic in the their inattention to visual word units. Sixteenth-century title pages very commonly divide even major words, including the author's name, with hyphens, presenting the first part of a word in one line in large type and the latter part in smaller type, as in the edition of Sir Thomas Elyot's The Boke Named the Gouernour published in London by Thomas Berthelet in 1534 (Figure 1 here; see Steinberg 1974, p. 154). Inconsequential words may be set in huge type faces: on the title page shown here the initial `THE' is by far the most prominent

Figure 1

print, space and closure

119

word of all. The result is often aesthetically pleasing as a visual design, but it plays havoc with our present sense of textuality. Yet this practice, not our practice, is the original practice from which our present practice has deviated. Our attitudes are the ones that have changed, and thus that need to be explained. Why does the original, presumably more `natural' procedure seem wrong to us? Because we feel the printed words before us as visual units (even though we sound them at least in the imagination when we read). Evidently, in processing text for meaning, the sixteenth century was concentrating less on the sight of the word and more on its sound than we do. All text involves sight and sound. But whereas we feel reading as a visual activity cueing in sounds for us, the early age of print still felt it as primarily a listening process, simply set in motion by sight. If you felt yourself as reader to be listening to words, what difference did it make if the visible text went its own visually aesthetic way? It will be recalled that pre-print manuscripts commonly ran words together or kept spaces between them minimal. Eventually, however, print replaced the lingering hearingdominance in the world of thought and expression with the sight-dominance which had its beginnings with writing but could not flourish with the support of writing alone. Print situates words in space more relentlessly than writing ever did. Writing moves words from the sound world to a world of visual space, but print locks words into position in this space. Control of position is everything in print. `Composing' type by hand (the original form of typesetting) consists in positioning by hand preformed letter types, which, after use, are carefully repositioned, redistributed for future use into their proper compartments in the case (capitals or `upper case' letters in the upper compartments, small or `lower case' letters in the lower compartments). Composing on the linotype consists in using a machine to position the separate matrices for individual lines so that a line of type can be cast from the properly positioned matrices. Composing on a computer terminal or wordprocesser positions electronic patterns (letters) previously programmed into the computer. Printing from `hot metal' type (that is, from cast type  the older process) calls for locking up the type in an absolutely rigid position in the chase, locking the chase firmly onto a press, affixing and

120 orality and literacy
clamping down the makeready, and squeezing the forme of type with great pressure onto the paper printing surface in contact with the platen. Most readers are of course not consciously aware of all this locomotion that has produced the printed text confronting them. Nevertheless, from the appearance of the printed text they pick up a sense of the word-in-space quite different from that conveyed by writing. Printed texts look machine-made, as they are. Chirographic control of space tends to be ornamental, ornate, as in calligraphy. Typographic control typically impresses more by its tidiness and inevitability: the lines perfectly regular, all justified on the right side, everything coming out even visually, and without the aid of the guidelines or ruled borders that often occur in manuscripts. This is an insistent world of cold, nonhuman, facts. `That's the way it is'  Walter Cronkite's television signature comes from the world of print that underlies the secondary orality of television (Ong 1971, pp. 284303). By and large, printed texts are far easier to read than manuscript texts. The effects of the greater legibility of print are massive. The greater legibility ultimately makes for rapid, silent reading. Such reading in turn makes for a different relationship between the reader and the authorial voice in the text and calls for different styles of writing. Print involves many persons besides the author in the production of a work  publishers, literary agents, publishers' readers, copy editors and others. Before as well as after scrutiny by such persons, writing for print often calls for painstaking revisions by the author of an order of magnitude virtually unknown in a manuscript culture. Few lengthy prose works from manuscript cultures could pass editorial scrutiny as original works today: they are not organized for rapid assimilation from a printed page. Manuscript culture is producer-oriented, since every individual copy of a work represents great expenditure of an individual copyist's time. Medieval manuscripts are turgid with abbreviations, which favor the copyist although they inconvenience the reader. Print is consumer-oriented, since the individual copies of a work represent a much smaller investment of time: a few hours spent in producing a more readable text will immediately improve thousands upon thousands of copies. The effects of print on thought and style have yet to be assessed fully. The journal Visible Language (formerly called

print, space and closure

121

the Journal of Typographic Research) published many articles contributory to such an assessment.

SPACE AND MEANING
Writing had reconstituted the originally oral, spoken word in visual space. Print embedded the word in space more definitively. This can be seen in such developments as lists, especially alphabetic indexes, in the use of words (instead of iconographic signs) for labels, in the use of printed drawings of all sorts to convey information, and in the use of abstract typographic space to interact geometrically with printed words in a line of development that runs from Ramism to concrete poetry and to Derrida's logomachy with the (printed, typically, not simply written) text. (i) Indexes Lists begin with writing. Goody has discussed (1977, pp. 741 1 1) the use of lists in the Ugaritic script of around 1300 BC and in other early scripts. He notes (1977, pp. 878) that the information in the lists is abstracted from the social situation in which it had been embedded (`fattened kids', `pastured ewes', etc., with no further specifications) and also from linguistic context (normally in oral utterance nouns are not free-floating as in lists, but are embedded in sentences: rarely do we hear an oral recitation of simply a string of nouns  unless they are being read off a written or printed list). In this sense, lists as such have `no oral equivalent' (1977, pp. 867) though of course the individual written words sound in the inner ear to yield their meanings. Goody also notes the initially awkward, ad hoc way in which space was utilized in making these lists, with word-dividers to separate items from numbers, ruled lines, wedged lines, and elongated lines. Besides administrative lists, he discusses also event lists, lexical lists (words are listed in various orders, often hierarchically by meaning  gods, then kin of the gods, next gods' servants), and Egyptian onomastica or name-lists, which were often memorized for oral recitation. Still highly oral manuscript culture felt that having written series of things readied for oral recall was of itself intellectually improving. (Educators in the West

122 orality and literacy
until recently had the same feeling, and across the world most educators probably still do.) Writing is here once more at the service of orality. Goody's examples show the relatively sophisticated processing of verbalized material in chirographic cultures so as to make the material more immediately retrievable through its spatial organization. Lists range names of related items in the same physical, visual space. Print develops far more sophisticated use of space for visual organization and for effective retrieval. Indexes are a prime development here. Alphabetic indexes show strikingly the disengagement of words from discourse and their embedding in typographic space. Manuscripts can be alphabetically indexed. They rarely are (Daly 1967, pp. 8190; Clanchy 1979, pp. 28 9, 85). Since two manuscripts of a given work, even if copied from the same dictation, almost never correspond page for page, each manuscript of a given work would normally require a separate index. Indexing was not worth the effort. Auditory recall through memorization was more economical, though not thorough-going. For visual location of materials in a manuscript text, pictorial signs were often preferred to alphabetic indexes. A favorite sign was the `paragraph', which originally meant this mark , not a unit of discourse at all. When alphabetic indexes occurred, they were rare, often crude, and commonly not understood, even in thirteenth-century Europe, when sometimes an index made for one manuscript was appended without change of page numbers to another manuscript with a different pagination (Clanchy 1979, p. 144). Indexes seem to have been valued at times for their beauty and mystery rather than for their utility. In 1286, a Genoese compiler could marvel at the alphabetical catalogue he had devised as due not to his own prowess but `the grace of God working in me' (Daly 1967, p. 73). Indexing was long by first letter only  or, rather, by first sound: for example, in a Latin work published as late as 1506 in Rome, since in Italian and Latin as spoken by Italian-speakers the letter h is not pronounced, `Halyzones' is listed under a (discussed in Ong 1977, pp. 16972). Here even visual retrieval functions aurally. Ioannes Ravisius Textor's Specimen epithetorum (Paris, 1518), alphabetizes `Apollo' before all other entries under a, because Textor considers it fitting that in a work concerned with poetry, the god of poetry should get top billing.

print, space and closure

123

Clearly, even in a printed alphabetic index, visual retrieval was given low priority. The personalized, oral world still could overrule processing words as things. The alphabetic index is actually a crossroads between auditory and visualist cultures. `Index' is a shortened form of the original index locorum or index locorum communium, `index of places' or `index of commonplaces'. Rhetoric had provided the various loci or `places'  headings, we would style them  under which various `arguments' could be found, headings such as cause, effect, related things, unlike things, and so on. Coming with this orally based, formulary equipment to the text, the indexer of 400 years ago simply noted on what pages in the text one or another locus was exploited, listing there the locus and the corresponding pages in the index locorum. The loci had originally been thought of as, vaguely, `places' in the mind where ideas were stored. In the printed book, these vague psychic `places' became quite physically and visibly localized. A new noetic world was shaping up, spatially organized. In this new world, the book was less like an utterance, and more like a thing. Manuscript culture had preserved a feeling for a book as a kind of utterance, an occurrence in the course of conversation, rather than as an object. Lacking title pages and often titles, a book from pre-print, manuscript culture is normally catalogued by its `incipit' (a Latin verb meaning `it begins'), or the first words of its text (referring to the Lord's Prayer as the `Our Father' is referring to it by its incipit and evinces a certain residual orality). With print, as has been seen, come title pages. Title pages are labels. They attest a feeling for the book as a kind of thing or object. Often in medieval western manuscripts, instead of a title page the text proper might be introduced by an observation to the reader, just as a conversation might start with a remark of one person to another: `Hic habes, carissime lector, librum quem scripset quidam de. . . .' (Here you have, dear reader, a book which so-and-so wrote about. . . .) The oral heritage is at work here, for, although oral cultures of course have ways of referring to stories or other traditional recitations (the stories of the Wars of Troy, the Mwindo stories, and so on), label-like titles as such are not very operational in oral cultures: Homer would hardly have begun a recitation of episodes from the Iliad by announcing `The Iliad'.

124 orality and literacy
(ii) Books, contents and labels Once print has been fairly well interiorized, a book was sensed as a kind of object which `contained' information, scientific, fictional or other, rather than, as earlier, a recorded utterance (Ong 1958b, p. 313). Each individual book in a printed edition was physically the same as another, an identical object, as manuscript books were not, even when they presented the same text. Now, with print, two copies of a given work did not merely say the same thing, they were duplicates of one another as objects. The situation invited the use of labels, and the printed book, being a lettered object, naturally took a lettered label, the title page (new with print  Steinberg 1974, pp. 1458). At the same time the iconographic drive was still strong, as is seen in the highly emblematic engraved title pages that persisted through the 1660s, filled with allegorical figures and other nonverbal designs. (iii) Meaningful surface Ivins (1953, p. 31) has pointed out that, although the art of printing designs from various carved surfaces had been known for centuries, only after the development of movable letterpress type in the mid1400s were prints used systematically to convey information. Handdone technical drawings, as Ivins has shown (1953, pp. 1416, 405) soon deteriorated in manuscripts because even skilled artists miss the point of an illustration they are copying unless they are supervised by an expert in the field the illustrations refer to. Otherwise, a sprig of white clover copied by a succession of artists unfamiliar with real white clover can end up looking like asparagus. Prints might have solved the problem in a manuscript culture, since print-making had been practiced for centuries for decorative purposes. Cutting an accurate printing block for white clover would have been quite feasible long before the invention of letterpress printing, and would have provided just what was needed, an `exactly repeatable visual statement'. But manuscript production was not congenial to such manufacture. Manuscripts were produced by handwriting, not from pre-existing parts. Print was congenial. The verbal text was reproduced from pre-existing parts, and so could prints be. A press could print an

print, space and closure

125

`exactly repeatable visual statement' as easily as a forme set up from type. One consequence of the new exactly repeatable visual statement was modern science. Exact observation does not begin with modern science. For ages, it has always been essential for survival among, for example, hunters and craftsmen of many sorts. What is distinctive of modern science is the conjuncture of exact observation and exact verbalization: exactly worded descriptions of carefully observed complex objects and processes. The availability of carefully made, technical prints (first woodcuts, and later even more exactly detailed metal engravings) implemented such exactly worded descriptions. Technical prints and technical verbalization reinforced and improved each other. The resulting hypervisualized noetic world was brand new. Ancient and medieval writers are simply unable to produce exactly worded descriptions of complex objects at all approximating the descriptions that appear after print and, indeed, that mature chiefly with the Age of Romanticism, that is, the age of the Industrial Revolution. Oral and residually oral verbalization directs its attention to action, not to the visual appearance of objects or scenes or persons (Fritschi 1981, pp. 656; cf. Havelock 1963, pp. 6196). Vitruvius' treatise on architecture is notoriously vague. The kinds of exactitude aimed at by the long-standing rhetorical tradition were not of a visualvocal sort. Eisenstein (1979, p. 64) suggests how difficult it is today to imagine earlier cultures where relatively few persons had ever seen a physically accurate picture of anything. The new noetic world opened by exactly repeatable visual statement and correspondingly exact verbal description of physical reality affected not just science but literature as well. No pre-Romantic prose provides the circumstantial description of landscape found in Gerard Manley Hopkins's notebooks (1937) and no pre-Romantic poetry proceeds with the close, meticulous, clinical attention to natural phenomena found, for example, in Hopkins's description of a plunging brook in Inversnaid. As much as Darwin's evolutionary biology or Michelson's physics this kind of poetry grows out of the world of print.

126 orality and literacy
(iv) Typographic space Because visual surface had become charged with imposed meaning and because print controlled not only what words were put down to form a text but also the exact situation of the words on the page and their spatial relationship to one another, the space itself on a printed sheet  `white space' as it is called  took on high significance that leads directly into the modern and post-modern world. Manuscript lists and charts, discussed by Goody (1977, pp. 74111), can situate words in specific spatial relationships to one another, but if the spatial relationships are extremely complicated, the complications will not survive the vagaries of successive copiers. Print can reproduce with complete accuracy and in any quantity indefinitely complex lists and charts. Early in the age of print, extremely complex charts appear in the teaching of academic subjects (Ong 1958b, pp. 80, 81, 202, et passim). Typographic space works not only on the scientific and philosophic imagination, but also on the literary imagination, which shows some of the complicated ways in which typographic space is present to the psyche. George Herbert exploits typographic space to provide meaning in his `Easter Wings' and `The Altar', where the lines, of varying lengths, give the poems a visualized shape suggesting wings and an altar respectively. In manuscripts, this kind of visual structure would be only marginally viable. In Tristram Shandy (17607), Laurence Sterne uses typographic space with calculated whimsy, including in his book blank pages, to indicate his unwillingness to treat a subject and to invite the reader to fill in. Space here is the equivalent of silence. Much later, and with greater sophistication, Stphane Mallarm designs his poem `Un Coup de ds' to be set in varying fonts and sizes of type with the lines scattered calculatingly across the pages in a kind of typographical free-fall suggesting the chance that rules a throw of dice (the poem is reproduced and discussed in Bruns 1974, pp. 11538). Mallarm's declared objective is to `avoid narrative' and `space out' the reading of the poem so that the page, with its typographic spaces, not the line, is the unit of verse. E. E. Cummings's untitled Poem No. 276 (1968) about the grasshopper disintegrates the words of its text and scatters them unevenly about the page until at last letters come together in the final word `grasshopper'  all this to suggest the erratic and optically

print, space and closure

127

dizzying flight of a grasshopper until he finally reassembles himself straightforwardly on the blade of grass before us. White space is so integral to Cummings's poem that it is utterly impossible to read the poem aloud. The sounds cued in by the letters have to be present in the imagination but their presence is not simply auditory: it interacts with the visually and kinesthetically perceived space around them. Concrete poetry (Solt 1970) climaxes in a certain way the interaction of sounded words and typographic space. It presents exquisitely complicated or exquisitely uncomplicated visual displays of letters and/or words some of which can be viewed but not read aloud at all, but none of which can be appropriated without some awareness of verbal sound. Even when concrete poetry cannot be read at all, it is still not merely a picture. Concrete poetry is a minor genre, often merely gimmicky  a fact which makes it all the more necessary to explain the drive to produce it. Hartman (1981, p. 35) has suggested a connection between concrete poetry and Jacques Derrida's on-going logomachy with the text. The connection is certainly real and deserves more attention. Concrete poetry plays with the dialectic of the word locked into space as opposed to the sounded, oral word which can never be locked into space (every text is pretext), that is, it plays with the absolute limitations of textuality which paradoxically reveal the built-in limitations of the spoken word, too. This is Derrida's terrain, though he moves over it at his own calculated gait. Concrete poetry is not the product of writing but of typography, as has been seen. Deconstruction is tied to typography rather than, as its advocates seem often to assume, merely to writing.

MORE DIFFUSE EFFECTS
One can list without end additional effects, more or less direct, which print had on the noetic economy or the `mentality' of the West. Print eventually removed the ancient art of (orally based) rhetoric from the center of academic education. It encouraged and made possible on a large scale the quantification of knowledge, both through the use of mathematical analysis and through the use of diagrams and charts. Print eventually reduced the appeal of iconography in the management

128 orality and literacy
of knowledge, despite the fact that the early ages of print put iconographic illustrations into circulation as they had never been before. Iconographic figures are akin to the `heavy' or type characters of oral discourse and they are associated with rhetoric and with the arts of memory that oral management of knowledge needs (Yates 1966). Print produced exhaustive dictionaries and fostered the desire to legislate for `correctness' in language. This desire in great part grew out of a sense of language based on the study of Learned Latin. Learned tongues textualize the idea of language, making it seem at root something written. Print reinforces the sense of language as essentially textual. The printed text, not the written text, is the text in its fullest, paradigmatic form. Print established the climate in which dictionaries grew. From their origins in the eighteenth century until the past few decades, dictionaries of English have commonly taken as their norm for language only the usage of writers producing text for print (and not quite all of them). The usage of all others, if it deviates from this typographic usage, has been regarded as `corrupt'. Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1961) was the first major lexicographical work to break cleanly with this old typographical convention and to cite as sources for usage persons not writing for print  and of course many persons, formed in the old ideology, immediately wrote off this impressive lexicographical achievement (Dykema 1963) as a betrayal of the `true' or `pure' language. Print was also a major factor in the development of the sense of personal privacy that marks modern society. It produced books smaller and more portable than those common in a manuscript culture, setting the stage psychologically for solo reading in a quiet corner, and eventually for completely silent reading. In manuscript culture and hence in early print culture, reading had tended to be a social activity, one person reading to others in a group. As Steiner (1967, p. 383) has suggested, private reading demands a home spacious enough to provide for individual isolation and quiet. (Teachers of children from poverty areas today are acutely aware that often the major reason for poor performance is that there is nowhere in a crowded house where a boy or girl can study effectively.) Print created a new sense of the private ownership of words. Persons

print, space and closure

129

in a primary oral culture can entertain some sense of proprietary rights to a poem, but such a sense is rare and ordinarily enfeebled by the common share of lore, formulas, and themes on which everyone draws. With writing, resentment at plagiarism begins to develop. The ancient Latin poet Martial (i. 53.9) uses the word plagiarius, a torturer, plunderer, oppressor, for someone who appropriates another's writing. But there is no special Latin word with the exclusive meaning of plagiarist or plagiarism. The oral commonplace tradition was still strong. In the very early days of print, however, a royal decree or privilegium was often secured forbidding the reprinting of a printed book by others than the original publisher. Richard Pynson secured such a privilegium in 1518 from Henry VIII. In 1557 the Stationers' Company was incorporated in London to oversee authors' and printers' or printer-publishers' rights, and by the eighteenth century modern copyright laws were shaping up over western Europe. Typography had made the word into a commodity. The old communal oral world had split up into privately claimed freeholdings. The drift in human consciousness toward greater individualism had been served well by print. Of course, words were not quite private property. They were still shared property to a degree. Printed books did echo one another, willy-nilly. At the onset of the electronic age, Joyce faced up to the anxieties of influence squarely and in Ulysses and Finnegans Wake undertook to echo everybody on purpose. By removing words from the world of sound where they had first had their origin in active human interchange and relegating them definitively to visual surface, and by otherwise exploiting visual space for the management of knowledge, print encouraged human beings to think of their own interior conscious and unconscious resources as more and more thing-like, impersonal and religiously neutral. Print encouraged the mind to sense that its possessions were held in some sort of inert mental space.

PRINT AND CLOSURE: INTERTEXTUALITY
Print encourages a sense of closure, a sense that what is found in a text has been finalized, has reached a state of completion. This sense affects literary creations and it affects analytic philosophical or scientific work. Before print, writing itself encouraged some sense of noetic closure.

130 orality and literacy
By isolating thought on a written surface, detached from any interlocutor, making utterance in this sense autonomous and indifferent to attack, writing presents utterance and thought as uninvolved with all else, somehow self-contained, complete. Print in the same way situates utterance and thought on a surface disengaged from everything else, but it also goes farther in suggesting self-containment. Print encloses thought in thousands of copies of a work of exactly the same visual and physical consistency. Verbal correspondence of copies of the same printing can be checked with no resort to sound at all but simply by sight: a Hinman collator superimposed corresponding pages of two copies of a text and signal variations to the viewer with a blinking light. The printed text is supposed to represent the words of an author in definitive or `final' form. For print is comfortable only with finality. Once a letterpress forme is closed, locked up, or a photolithographic plate is made, and the sheet printed, the text does not accommodate changes (erasures, insertions) so readily as do written texts. By contrast, manuscripts, with their glosses or marginal comments (which often got worked into the text in subsequent copies) were in dialogue with the world outside their own borders. They remained closer to the give-and-take of oral expression. The readers of manuscripts are less closed off from the author, less absent, than are the readers of those writing for print. The sense of closure or completeness enforced by print is at times grossly physical. A newspaper's pages are normally all filled  certain kinds of printed material are called `fillers'  just as its lines of type are normally all justified (i.e. all exactly the same width). Print is curiously intolerant of physical incompleteness. It can convey the impression, unintentionally and subtly, but very really, that the material the text deals with is similarly complete or self-consistent. Print makes for more tightly closed verbal art forms, especially in narrative. Until print, the only linearly plotted lengthy story line was that of the drama, which from antiquity had been controlled by writing. Euripides' tragedies were texts composed in writing and then memorized verbatim to be presented orally. With print, tight plotting is extended to the lengthy narrative, in the novel from Jane Austen's time on, and reaches its peak in the detective story. These forms will be discussed in the next chapter. In literary theory, print gives rise ultimately to Formalism and the

print, space and closure

131

New Criticism, with their deep conviction that each work of verbal art is closed off in a world of its own, a `verbal icon'. Significantly, an icon is something seen, not heard. Manuscript culture felt works of verbal art to be more in touch with the oral plenum, and never very effectively distinguished between poetry and rhetoric. More will be said of Formalism and the New Criticism also in the next chapter. Print ultimately gives rise to the modern issue of intertextuality, which is so central a concern in phenomenological and critical circles today (Hawkes 1977, p. 144). Intertextuality refers to a literary and psychological commonplace: a text cannot be created simply out of lived experience. A novelist writes a novel because he or she is familiar with this kind of textual organization of experience. Manuscript culture had taken intertextuality for granted. Still tied to the commonplace tradition of the old oral world, it deliberately created texts out of other texts, borrowing, adapting, sharing the common, originally oral, formulas and themes, even though it worked them up into fresh literary forms impossible without writing. Print culture of itself has a different mindset. It tends to feel a work as `closed', set off from other works, a unit in itself. Print culture gave birth to the romantic notions of `originality' and `creativity', which set apart an individual work from other works even more, seeing its origins and meaning as independent of outside influence, at least ideally. When in the past few decades doctrines of intertextuality arose to counteract the isolationist aesthetics of a romantic print culture, they came as a kind of shock. They were all the more disquieting because modern writers, agonizingly aware of literary history and of the de facto intertextuality of their own works, are concerned that they may be producing nothing really new or fresh at all, that they maybe totally under the `influence' of others' texts. Harold Bloom's work The Anxiety of Influence (1973) treats this modern writer's anguish. Manuscript cultures had few if any anxieties about influence to plague them, and oral cultures had virtually none. Print creates a sense of closure not only in literary works but also in analytic philosophical and scientific works. With print came the catechism and the `textbook', less discursive and less disputatious than most previous presentations of a given academic subject. Catechisms and textbooks presented `facts' or their equivalents: memorizable, flat statements

132 orality and literacy
that told straightforwardly and inclusively how matters stood in a given field. By contrast, the memorable statements of oral cultures and of residually oral manuscript cultures tended to be of a proverbial sort, presenting not `facts' but rather reflections, often of a gnomic kind, inviting further reflection by the paradoxes they involved. Peter Ramus (151572) produced the paradigms of the textbook genre: textbooks for virtually all arts subjects (dialectic or logic, rhetoric, grammar, arithmetic, etc.) that proceeded by cold-blooded definitions and divisions leading to still further definitions and more divisions, until every last particle of the subject had been dissected and disposed of. A Ramist textbook on a given subject had no acknowledged interchange with anything outside itself. Not even any difficulties or `adversaries' appeared. A curriculum subject or `art', if presented properly according to Ramist method, involved no difficulties at all (so Ramists maintained): if you defined and divided in the proper way, everything in the art was completely self-evident and the art itself was complete and self-contained. Ramus relegated difficulties and refutations of adversaries to separate `lectures' (scholae) on dialectic, rhetoric, grammar, arithmetic, and all the rest. These lectures lay outside the selfenclosed `art'. Moreover, the material in each of the Ramist textbooks could be presented in printed dichotomized outlines or charts that showed exactly how the material was organized spatially in itself and in the mind. Every art was in itself completely separate from every other, as houses with intervening open spaces are separate from one another, though the arts were mingled in `use'  that is to say, in working up a given passage of discourse, one used simultaneously logic, grammar, rhetoric, and possible other arts as well (Ong 1958b, pp. 301, 22569, 280). A correlative of the sense of closure fostered by print was the fixed point of view, which as Marshall McLuhan pointed out (1962, pp. 1267, 1356), came into being with print. With the fixed point of view, a fixed tone could now be preserved through the whole of a lengthy prose composition. The fixed point of view and fixed tone showed in one way a greater distance between writer and reader and in another way a greater tacit understanding. The writer could go his or her own way confidently (greater distance, lack of concern). There was no need to make everything a kind of Menippean satire, a mixture of

print, space and closure

133

various points of view and tone for various sensibilities. The writer could be confident that the reader would adjust (greater understanding). At this point, the `reading public' came into existence  a sizable clientele of readers unknown personally to the author but able to deal with certain more or less established points of view.

POST-TYPOGRAPHY: ELECTRONICS
The electronic transformation of verbal expression has both deepened the commitment of the word to space initiated by writing and intensified by print and has brought consciousness to a new age of secondary orality. Although the full relationship of the electronically processed word to the oralityliteracy polarity with which this book concerns itself is too vast a subject to be considered in its totality here, some few points need to be made. Despite what is sometimes said, electronic devices are not eliminating printed books but are actually producing more of them. Electronically taped interviews produce `talked' books and articles by the thousands which would never have seen print before taping was possible. The new medium here reinforces the old, but of course transforms it because it fosters a new, self-consciously informal style, since typographic folk believe that oral exchange should normally be informal (oral folk believe it should normally be formal  Ong 1977, pp. 8291). Moreover, as earlier noted, composition on computer terminals is replacing older forms of typographic composition, so that soon virtually all printing will be done in one way or another with the aid of electronic equipment. And of course information of all sorts electronically gathered and/or processed makes its way into print to swell the typographic output. Finally, the sequential processing and spatializing of the word, initiated by writing and raised to a new order of intensity by print, is further intensified by the computer, which maximizes commitment of the word to space and to (electronic) local motion and optimizes analytic sequentiality by making it virtually instantaneous. At the same time, with telephone, radio, television and various kinds of sound tape, electronic technology has brought us into the age of `secondary orality'. This new orality has striking resemblances to the

134 orality and literacy
old in its participatory mystique, its fostering of a communal sense, its concentration on the present moment, and even its use of formulas (Ong 1971, pp. 284303; 1977, pp. 1649, 30541). But it is essentially a more deliberate and self-conscious orality, based permanently on the use of writing and print, which are essential for the manufacture and operation of the equipment and for its use as well. Secondary orality is both remarkably like and remarkably unlike primary orality. Like primary orality, secondary orality has generated a strong group sense, for listening to spoken words forms hearers into a group, a true audience, just as reading written or printed texts turns individuals in on themselves. But secondary orality generates a sense for groups immeasurably larger than those of primary oral culture  McLuhan's `global village'. Moreover, before writing, oral folk were group-minded because no feasible alternative had presented itself. In our age of secondary orality, we are groupminded self-consciously and programmatically. The individual feels that he or she, as an individual, must be socially sensitive. Unlike members of a primary oral culture, who are turned outward because they have had little occasion to turn inward, we are turned outward because we have turned inward. In a like vein, where primary orality promotes spontaneity because the analytic reflectiveness implemented by writing is unavailable, secondary orality promotes spontaneity because through analytic reflection we have decided that spontaneity is a good thing. We plan our happenings carefully to be sure that they are thoroughly spontaneous. The contrast between oratory in the past and in today's world well highlights the contrast between primary and secondary orality. Radio and television have brought major political figures as public speakers to a larger public than was ever possible before modern electronic developments. Thus in a sense orality has come into its own more than ever before. But it is not the old orality. The old-style oratory coming from primary orality is gone forever. In the Lincoln-Douglas debates of 1858, the combatants  for that is what they clearly and truly were  faced one another often in the scorching Illinois summer sun outdoors, before wildly responsive audiences of as many as 12,000 or 15,000 persons (at Ottawa and Freeport, Illinois, respectively  Sparks 1908, pp. 1378, 18990), speaking for an hour and a half each. The first speaker had one hour, the second an hour and a half, and the first

print, space and closure

135

another half hour of rebuttal  all this with no amplifying equipment. Primary orality made itself felt in the additive, redundant, carefully balanced, highly agonistic style, and the intense interplay between speaker and audience. The debaters were hoarse and physically exhausted at the end of each bout. Presidential debates on television today are completely out of this older oral world. The audience is absent, invisible, inaudible. The candidates are ensconced in tight little booths, make short presentations, and engage in crisp little conversations with each other in which any agonistic edge is deliberately kept dull. Electronic media do not tolerate a show of open antagonism. Despite their cultivated air of spontaneity, these media are totally dominated by a sense of closure which is the heritage of print: a show of hostility might break open the closure, the tight control. Candidates accommodate themselves to the psychology of the media. Genteel, literate domesticity is rampant. Only quite elderly persons today can remember what oratory was like when it was still in living contact with its primary oral roots. Others perhaps hear more oratory, or at least more talk, from major public figures than people commonly heard a century ago. But what they hear will give them very little idea of the old oratory reaching back from pre-electronic times through two millennia and far beyond, or of the oral lifestyle and oral thought structures out of which such oratory grew.

6
ORAL MEMORY, THE STORY LINE AND CHARACTERIZATION
THE PRIMACY OF THE STORY LINE
The shift from orality to literacy registers in many genres of verbal art  lyric, narrative, descriptive discourse, oratory (purely oral through chirographically organized oratory to television-styled public address), drama, philosophical and scientific works, historiography, and biography, to mention only a few. Of these, the genre most studied in terms of the oralityliteracy shift has been narrative. It will be of use here to consider some of the work done on narrative to suggest some newer insights offered by oralityliteracy studies. To narrative we can for present purposes assimilate drama, which, while it presents action with no narrative voice, still has a story line, as narrative does. Obviously, other developments in society besides the oralityliteracy shift help determine the development of narrative over the ages  changing political organization, religious development, intercultural exchanges, and much else, including developments in the other verbal genres. This treatment of narrative is not intended to reduce all causality to the oralityliteracy shift but only to show some of the effects which this shift produces. Narrative is everywhere a major genre of verbal art, occurring all the

oral memory, the story line and characterization

137

way from primary oral cultures into high literacy and electronic information processing. In a sense narrative is paramount among all verbal art forms because of the way it underlies so many other art forms, often even the most abstract. Human knowledge comes out of time. Behind even the abstractions of science, there lies narrative of the observations on the basis of which the abstractions have been formulated. Students in a science laboratory have to `write up' experiments, which is to say, they have to narrate what they did and what happened when they did it. From the narration, certain generalizations or abstract conclusions can be formulated. Behind proverbs and aphorisms and philosophical speculation and religious ritual lies the memory of human experience strung out in time and subject to narrative treatment. Lyric poetry implies a series of events in which the voice in the lyric is embedded or to which it is related. All of this is to say that knowledge and discourse come out of human experience and that the elemental way to process human experience verbally is to give an account of it more or less as it really comes into being and exists, embedded in the flow of time. Developing a story line is a way of dealing with this flow.

NARRATIVE AND ORAL CULTURES
Although it is found in all cultures, narrative is in certain ways more widely functional in primary oral cultures than in others. First, in a primary oral culture, as Havelock pointed out (1978a; cf. 1963), knowledge cannot be managed in elaborate, more or less scientifically abstract categories. Oral cultures cannot generate such categories, and so they use stories of human action to store, organize, and communicate much of what they know. Most, if not all, oral cultures generate quite substantial narratives or series of narratives, such as the stories of the Trojan wars among the ancient Greeks, the coyote stories among various Native American populations, the Anansi (spider) stories in Belize and other Caribbean cultures with some African heritage, the Sunjata stories of old Mali, the Mwindo stories among the Nyanga, and so on. Because of their size and complexity of scenes and actions, narratives of this sort are often the roomiest repositories of an oral culture's lore.

138 orality and literacy
Second, narrative is particularly important in primary oral cultures because it can bond a great deal of lore in relatively substantial, lengthy forms that are reasonably durable  which in an oral culture means forms subject to repetition. Maxims, riddles, proverbs, and the like are of course also durable, but they are usually brief. Ritual formulas, which may be lengthy, have most often specialized content. Genealogies, which can be relatively long, present only highly specialized information. Other lengthy verbal performance in a primary oral culture tends to be topical, a nonce occurrence. Thus an oration might be as substantial and lengthy as a major narrative, or a part of a narrative that would be delivered at one sitting, but an oration is not durable: it is not normally repeated. It addresses itself to a particular situation and, in the total absence of writing, disappears from the human scene for good with the situation itself. Lyric tends to be either brief or topical or both. And so with other forms. In a writing or print culture, the text physically bonds whatever it contains and makes it possible to retrieve any kind of organization of thought as a whole. In primary oral cultures, where there is no text, the narrative serves to bond thought more massively and permanently than other genres.

ORAL MEMORY AND THE STORY LINE
Narrative itself has a history. Scholes and Kellogg (1966) surveyed and schematized some of the ways in which narrative in the West has developed from some of its ancient oral origins into the present, with full attention to complex social, psychological, aesthetic, and other factors. Acknowledging the complexities of the full history of narrative, the present account will simply call attention to some salient differences that set off narrative in a totally oral cultural setting from literate narrative, with particular attention to the functioning of memory. The retention and recall of knowledge in primary oral culture, described in Chapter 3, calls for noetic structures and procedures of a sort quite unfamiliar to us and often enough scorned by us. One of the places where oral mnemonic structures and procedures manifest themselves most spectacularly is in their effect on narrative plot, which in an oral culture is not quite what we take plot typically to be. Persons from

oral memory, the story line and characterization

139

today's literate and typographic cultures are likely to think of consciously contrived narrative as typically designed in a climactic linear plot often diagramed as the well-known `Freytag's pyramid' (i.e. an upward slope, followed by a downward slope): an ascending action builds tension, rising to a climactic point, which consists often of a recognition or other incident bringing about a peripeteia or reversal of action, and which is followed by a dnouement or untying  for this standard climactic linear plot has been likened to the tying and untying of a knot. This is the kind of plot Aristotle finds in the drama (Poetics 1451b1452b)  a significant locale for such plot, since Greek drama, though orally performed, was composed as a written text and in the West was the first verbal genre, and for centuries was the only verbal genre, to be controlled completely by writing. Ancient Greek oral narrative, the epic, was not plotted this way. In his Ars Poetica, Horace writes that the epic poet `hastens into the action and precipitates the hearer into the middle of things' (lines 1489). Horace has chiefly in mind the epic poet's disregard for temporal sequence. The poet will report a situation and only much later explain, often in detail, how it came to be. He probably has also in mind Homer's conciseness and vigor (Brink 1971, pp. 2212): Homer wants to get immediately to `where the action is'. However this may be, literate poets eventually interpreted Horace's in medias res as making hysteron proteron obligatory in the epic. Thus John Milton explains in the `Argument' to Book I of Paradise Lost that, after proposing `in brief the whole subject' of the poem and touching upon `the prime cause' of Adam's fall `the Poem hasts into the midst of things.' Milton's words here show that he had from the start a control of his subject and of the causes powering its action that no oral poet could command. Milton has in mind a highly organized plot, with a beginning, middle and end (Aristotle, Poetics 1450b) in a sequence corresponding temporally to that of the events he was reporting. This plot he deliberately dismembered in order to reassemble its parts in a consciously contrived anachronistic pattern. Exegesis of oral epic by literates in the past has commonly seen oral epic poets as doing this same thing, imputing to them conscious deviation from an organization which was in fact unavailable without writing. Such exegesis smacks of the same chirographic bias evident in the

140 orality and literacy
term `oral literature'. As oral performance is thought of as a variant of writing, so the oral epic plot is thought of as a variant of the plot worked out in writing for drama. Aristotle was already thinking this way in his Poetics (14471448a, 1451a, and elsewhere), which for obvious reasons shows a better understanding of the drama, written and acted in his own chirographic culture, than of the epic, the product of a primary oral culture long vanished. In fact, an oral culture has no experience of a lengthy, epic-size or novel-size climactic linear plot. It cannot organize even shorter narrative in the studious, relentless climactic way that readers of literature for the past 200 years have learned more and more to expect  and, in recent decades, self-consciously to depreciate. It hardly does justice to oral composition to describe it as varying from an organization it does not know, and cannot conceive of. The `things' that the action is supposed to start in the middle of have never, except for brief passages, been ranged in a chronological order to establish a `plot'. Horace's res is a construct of literacy. You do not find climactic linear plots readyformed in people's lives, although real lives may provide material out of which such a plot may be constructed by ruthless elimination of all but a few carefully highlighted incidents. The full story of all the events in Othello's whole life would be a complete bore. Oral poets characteristically experience difficulty in getting a song under way: Hesiod's Theogony, on the borderline between oral performance and written composition, makes three tries at the same material to get going (Peabody 1975, pp. 4323). Oral poets commonly plunged the reader in medias res not because of any grand design, but perforce. They had no choice, no alternative. Having heard perhaps scores of singers singing hundreds of songs of variable lengths about the Trojan War, Homer had a huge repertoire of episodes to string together but, without writing, absolutely no way to organize them in strict chronological order. There was no list of the episodes nor, in the absence of writing, was there any possibility even of conceiving of such a list. If he were to try to proceed in strict chronological order, the oral poet would on any given occasion be sure to leave out one or another episode at the point where it should fit chronologically and would have to put it in later on. If, on the next occasion, he remembered to put the episode in at the right chronological order, he would be sure

oral memory, the story line and characterization

141

to leave out other episodes or get them in the wrong chronological order. Moreover, the material in an epic is not the sort of thing that would of itself readily yield a climactic linear plot. If the episodes in the Iliad or the Odyssey are rearranged in strict chronological order, the whole has a progression, but it does not have the tight climactic structure of the typical drama. Whitman's chart of the organization of the Iliad (1965) suggests boxes within boxes created by thematic recurrences, not Freytag's pyramid. What made a good epic poet was not mastery of a climactic linear plot which he deconstructed by dint of a sophisticated trick called plunging his hearer in medias res. What made a good epic poet was, among other things of course, first, tacit acceptance of the fact that episodic structure was the only way and the totally natural way of imagining and handling lengthy narrative, and, second, possession of supreme skill in managing flashbacks and other episodic techniques. Starting in `the middle of things' is not a consciously contrived ploy but the original, natural, inevitable way to proceed for an oral poet approaching a lengthy narrative (very short accounts are perhaps another thing). If we take the climactic linear plot as the paradigm of plot, the epic has no plot. Strict plot for lengthy narrative comes with writing. Why is it that lengthy climactic plot comes into being only with writing, comes into being first in the drama, where there is no narrator, and does not make its way into lengthy narrative until more than 2000 years later with the novels of the age of Jane Austen? Earlier so-called `novels' were all more or less episodic, although Mme de la Fayette's La Princesse de Clves (1678) and a few others are less so than most. The climactic linear plot reaches a plenary form in the detective story  relentlessly rising tension, exquisitely tidy discovery and reversal, perfectly resolved dnouement. The detective story is generally considered to have begun in 1841 with Edgar Allan Poe's The Murders in the Rue Morgue. Why was all lengthy narrative before the early 1800s more or less episodic, so far as we know, all over the world (even Lady Murasaki Shikibu's otherwise precocious The Tale of Genji)? Why had no one written a tidy detective story before 1841? Some answers to these questions  though of course not all the answers  can be found

142 orality and literacy
in a deeper understanding of the dynamics of the oralityliteracy shift. Berkley Peabody opened new insights into the relationship of memory and plot in his lengthy work, The Winged Word: A Study in the Technique of Ancient Greek Oral Composition as Seen Principally through Hesiod's Works and Days (1975). Peabody builds not only on the work of Parry, Lord and Havelock, and related work, but also on work of earlier Europeans such as Antoine Meillet, Theodor Bergk, Hermann Usener, and Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, and upon some cybernetic and structuralist literature. He situates the psychodynamics of Greek epos in the Indo-European tradition, showing intimate connections between Greek metrics and Avestan and Indian Vedic and other Sanskrit metrics and the connections between the evolution of the hexameter line and noetic processes. This larger ambience in which Peabody situates his conclusions suggests still wider horizons beyond. Very likely, what he has to say about the place of plot and about related matters in ancient Greek narrative song will be found to apply in various ways to oral narrative in cultures around the entire world. And indeed, in his abundant notes, Peabody makes reference from time to time to Native American and other non-Indo-European traditions and practices. In part explicitly and in part by implication, Peabody brings out a certain incompatibility between linear plot (Freytag's pyramid) and oral memory, as earlier works were unable to do. He makes it clear that the true `thought' or content of ancient Greek oral epos dwells in the remembered traditional formulaic and stanzaic patterns rather than in the conscious intentions of the singer to organize or `plot' narrative in a certain remembered way (1975, pp. 1729). `A singer effects, not a transfer of his own intentions, but a conventional realization of traditional thought for his listeners, including himself' (1975, p. 176). The singer is not conveying `information' in our ordinary sense of `a pipeline transfer' of data from singer to listener. Basically, the singer is remembering in a curiously public way  remembering not a memorized text, for there is no such thing, nor any verbatim succession of words, but the themes and formulas that he has heard other singers sing. He remembers these always differently, as rhapsodized or stitched together in his own way on this particular occasion for this particular audience. `Song is the remembrance of songs sung' (1975, p. 216).

oral memory, the story line and characterization

143

The oral epic (and by hypothetical extension other forms of narrative in oral cultures) has nothing to do with creative imagination in the modern sense of this term, as applied to written composition. `Our own pleasure in deliberately forming new concepts, abstractions and patterns of fancy must not be attributed to the traditional singer' (1975, p. 216). When a bard adds new material, he processes it in the traditional way. The bard is always caught in a situation not entirely under his control: these people on this occasion want him to sing (1975, p.174). (We know from present-day experience how a performer, unexpectedly pressed by a group to perform, will normally at first demur, thereby provoking renewed invitations until finally he has established a workable relationship with his audience: `All right. If you insist . . .'.) The oral song (or other narrative) is the result of interaction between the singer, the present audience, and the singer's memories of songs sung. In working with this interaction, the bard is original and creative on rather different grounds from those of the writer. Since no one had ever sung the songs of the Trojan wars, for example, in full chronological sequence, no Homer could even think of singing them that way. Bardic objectives are not framed in terms of a tight over-all plot. In modern Zare (then the Democratic Republic of the Congo), Candi Rureke, when asked to narrate all the stories of the Nyanga hero Mwindo, was astonished (Biebuyck and Mateene 1971, p. 14): never, he protested, had anyone performed all the Mwindo episodes in sequence. We know how this performance was elicited from Rureke. As the result of previous negotiations with Biebuyck and Mateene, he narrated all the Mwindo stories, now in prose, now in verse, with occasional choral accompaniment, before a (somewhat fluid) audience, for twelve days, as three scribes, two Nyanga and one Belgian, took down his words. This is not much like writing a novel or a poem. Each day's performance tired Rureke both psychologically and physically, and after the twelve days he was totally exhausted. Peabody's profound treatment of memory throws bright new light on many of the characteristics of orally based thought and expression earlier discussed here in Chapter 3, notably on its additive, aggregative character, its conservatism, its redundancy or copia, and its participatory economy.

144 orality and literacy
Of course, narrative has to do with the temporal sequence of events, and thus in all narrative there is some kind of story line. As the result of a sequence of events, the situation at the end is subsequent to what it was at the beginning. Nevertheless, memory, as it guides the oral poet, often has little to do with strict linear presentation of events in temporal sequence. The poet will get caught up with the description of the hero's shield and completely lose the narrative track. In our typographic and electronic culture, we find ourselves today delighted by exact correspondence between the linear order of elements in discourse and the referential order, the chronological order in the world to which the discourse refers. We like sequence in verbal reports to parallel exactly what we experience or can arrange to experience. When today narrative abandons or distorts this parallelism, as in Robbe-Grillet's Marienbad or Julio Cortzar's Rayuela, the effect is clearly self-conscious: one is aware of the absence of the normally expected parallelism. Oral narrative is not greatly concerned with exact sequential parallelism between the sequence in the narrative and the sequence in extranarrative referents. Such a parallelism becomes a major objective only when the mind interiorizes literacy. It was precociously exploited, Peabody points out, by Sappho, and it gives her poems their curious modernity as reports on temporally lived personal experience (1975, p. 221). Of course by Sappho's time (fl. c. 600 BC) writing was already structuring the Greek psyche.

CLOSURE OF PLOT: TRAVELOGUE TO DETECTIVE STORY
The effects of literacy and later of print on the plotting of narrative are too vast to treat here in full detail. But some of the more generic effects are illuminated by considering the transit to literacy from orality. As the experience of working with text as text matures, the maker of the text, now properly an `author', acquires a feeling for expression and organization notably different from that of the oral performer before a live audience. The `author' can read the stories of others in solitude, can work from notes, can even outline a story in advance of writing it. Though inspiration continues to derive from unconscious sources, the writer can subject the unconscious inspiration to far greater conscious

oral memory, the story line and characterization

145

control than the oral narrator. The writer finds his written words accessible for reconsideration, revision, and other manipulation until they are finally released to do their work. Under the author's eyes the text lays out the beginning, the middle and the end, so that the writer is encouraged to think of his work as a self-contained, discrete unit, defined by closure. Because of increased conscious control, the story line develops tighter and tighter climactic structures in place of the old oral episodic plot. The ancient Greek drama, as has earlier been noted, was the first western verbal art form to be fully controlled by writing. It was the first  and for centuries the only  genre to have typically a tight, Freytagpyramid structure. Paradoxically, although the drama was presented orally, it had been composed before presentation as a written text. It is significant that dramatic presentation lacks a narrative voice. The narrator has buried himself completely in the text, disappeared beneath the voices of his characters. A narrator in an oral culture, as has been seen, normally and naturally operated in episodic patterning, and the elimination of narrative voice appears to have been essential at first to rid the story line of such patterning. We must not forget that episodic structure was the natural way to talk out a lengthy story line if only because the experience of real life is more like a string of episodes than it is like a Freytag pyramid. Careful selectivity produces the tight pyramidal plot, and this selectivity is implemented as never before by the distance that writing establishes between expression and real life. Outside drama, in narrative as such, the original voice of the oral narrator took on various new forms when it became the silent voice of the writer, as the distancing effected by writing invited various fictionalizations of the decontextualized reader and writer (Ong 1977, pp. 5381). But, until print appeared and eventually had its fuller effects, the voice's allegiance to episode always remained firm. Print, as has been seen, mechanically as well as psychologically locked words into space and thereby established a firmer sense of closure than writing could. The print world gave birth to the novel, which eventually made the definitive break with episodic structure, though the novel may not always have been so tightly organized in climactic form as many plays. The novelist was engaged more specifically with a text and less with auditors, imagined or real (for printed

146 orality and literacy
prose romances were often written to be read aloud). But his or her position was a bit unsettled still. The nineteenth-century novelist's recurrent `dear reader' reveals the problem of adjustment: the author still tends to feel an audience, listeners, somewhere, and must frequently recall that the story is not for listeners but for readers, each one alone in his or her own world. The addiction of Dickens and other nineteenth-century novelists to declamatory reading of selections from their novels also reveals the lingering feeling for the old oral narrator's world. An especially persistent ghost from this world was the itinerant hero, whose travels served to string episodes together and who survived through medieval romances and even through Cervantes' otherwise unbelievably precocious Don Quixote into Defoe (Robinson Crusoe was a stranded itinerant) and into Fielding's Tom Jones, Smollett's episodic narratives, and even some of Dickens, such as The Pickwick Papers. The pyramidally structured narrative, as has been seen, reaches its peak in the detective story, beginning with Poe's The Murders in the Rue Morgue, published in 1841. In the ideal detective story, ascending action builds relentlessly to all but unbearable tension, the climactic recognition and reversal releases the tension with explosive suddenness, and the dnouement disentangles everything totally  every single detail in the story turns out to have been crucial  and, until the climax and dnouement, effectively misleading. Chinese `detective novels', which began in the seventeenth century and matured in the eighteenth and nineteenth, share narrative materials with Poe, but never achieved Poe's climactic concision, interlarding their texts with `lengthy poems, philosophical digressions, and what not' (Gulik 1949, p. iii). Detective-story plots are deeply interior in that a full closure is commonly achieved inside the mind of one of the characters first and then diffused to the reader and the other fictional characters. Sherlock Holmes had it all figured out in his head before anyone else did, including especially the reader. This is typical of the detective story as against the simple `mystery' story, which does not have so tidy a closed organization. The `inward turn of narrative', in Kahler's term (1973), is strikingly illustrated here by contrast with the old oral narrative. The oral narrator's protagonist, distinguished typically for his external exploits, has been replaced by the interior consciousness of the typographic protagonist.

oral memory, the story line and characterization

147

Not infrequently the detective story shows some direct connection between plot and textuality. In The Gold-Bug (1843), Edgar Allan Poe not only places the key to the action inside Legrand's mind but also presents as its external equivalent a text, the written code that interprets the map locating the hidden treasure. The immediate problem that Legrand directly solves is not an existential problem (Where is the treasure?) but a textual one (How is this writing to be interpreted?). Once the textual problem is solved, everything else falls into place. And, as Thomas J. Farrell once pointed out to me, although the text is handwritten, the code in the text is largely typographic, made up not simply of letters of the alphabet but also of punctuation marks, which are minimal or nonexistent in manuscript but abundant in print. These marks are even farther from the oral world than letters of the alphabet are: though part of a text, they are unpronounceable, nonphonemic. The effect of print in maximizing the sense of isolation and closure is evident. What is inside the text and the mind is a complete unit, selfcontained in its silent inner logic. Later, varying this same theme in a kind of quasi-detective story, Henry James creates in The Aspern Papers (1888) a mysterious central character whose entire identity is bound up in a cache of his unpublished letters, which at the end of the story are incinerated, unread by the man who had dedicated his life to pursuing them to discover what sort of person Jeffrey Aspern really was. With the papers, the mystery of Aspern's person in his pursuivant's mind goes up in smoke. Textuality is incarnated in this haunting story. `The letter kills; the spirit gives life' (2 Corinthians 3:6). The very reflectiveness of writing  enforced by the slowness of the writing process as compared to oral delivery as well as by the isolation of the writer as compared to the oral performer  encourages growth of consciousness out of the unconscious. A detective-story writer is exquisitely more reflectively conscious than one of Peabody's epic narrators, as Edgar Allan Poe's own theorizing makes evident. Writing, as has been seen, is essentially a consciousness-raising activity. The tightly organized, classically plotted story both results from and encourages heightened consciousness, and this fact expresses itself symbolically when, with the arrival of the perfectly pyramidal plot in the detective story, the action is seen to be focused within the consciousness of the protagonist  the detective. In recent decades, as

148 orality and literacy
typographic culture has been transmuted into electronic culture, the tightly plotted story has fallen out of favor as too `easy' (that is, too fully controlled by consciousness) for author and reader. Avantgarde literature is now obliged to deplot its narratives or to obscure their plots. But deplotted stories of the electronic age are not episodic narratives. They are impressionistic and imagistic variations on the plotted stories that preceded them. Narrative plot now permanently bears the mark of writing and typography. When it structures itself in memories and echoes, suggestive of early primary oral narrative with its heavy reliance on the unconscious (Peabody 1975), it does so inevitably in a self-conscious, characteristically literate way, as in Alain Robbe-Grillet's La Jalousie or James Joyce's Ulysses.

THE `ROUND' CHARACTER, WRITING AND PRINT
The modern reader has typically understood effective `characterization' in narrative or drama as the production of the `round' character, to use E. M. Forster's term (1974, pp. 4654), the character that `has the incalculability of life about it'. Opposed to the `round' character is the `flat' character, the type of character that never surprises the reader but, rather, delights by fulfilling expectations copiously. We know now that the type `heavy' (or `flat') character derives originally from primary oral narrative, which can provide characters of no other kind. The type character serves both to organize the story line itself and to manage the non-narrative elements that occur in narrative. Around Odysseus (or, in other cultures, Brer Rabbit or the spider Anansi) the lore concerning cleverness can be made use of, around Nestor the lore about wisdom, and so on. As discourse moves from primary orality to greater and greater chirographic and typographic control, the flat, `heavy' or type character yields to characters that grow more and more `round', that is, that perform in ways at first blush unpredictable but ultimately consistent in terms of the complex character structure and complex motivation with which the round character is endowed. Complexity of motivation and internal psychological growth with the passage of time make the round character like a `real person'. The round character that emerged out of the novel depended for its appearance upon a great many

oral memory, the story line and characterization

149

developments. Scholes and Kellogg (1966, pp. 16577) suggest such influences as the interiorizing drive in the Old Testament and its intensification in Christianity, the Greek dramatic tradition, the Ovidian and Augustinian traditions of introspection, and the inwardness fostered by the medieval Celtic romances and the courtly-love tradition. But they also point out that the ramification of personal character traits was not perfected until the novel appeared with its sense of time not simply as a framework but as a constituent of human action. All these developments are inconceivable in primary oral cultures and in fact emerge in a world dominated by writing with its drive toward carefully itemized introspection and elaborately worked out analyses of inner states of soul and of their inwardly structured sequential relationships. Fuller explanation of the emergence of the `round' character must include an awareness of what writing, and later print, did to the old noetic economy. The first approximations we have of the round character are in the Greek tragedies, the first verbal genre controlled entirely by writing. These deal still with essentially public leaders rather than with the ordinary, domestic characters that can flourish in the novel, but Sophocles' Oedipus and, even more, Pentheus and Agave and Iphigenia and Orestes in Euripides' tragedies are incomparably more complex and interiorly anguished than any of Homer's characters. In orality-literacy perspectives, what we are dealing with here is the increasing interiorization of the world opened up by writing. Watt (1967, p. 75) calls attention to the `internalization of conscience' and the introspective habits that produced the feeling for human character found already in Defoe, and traces this to Defoe's Calvinist Puritan background. There is something distinctively Calvinistic in the way Defoe's introspective characters relate to the secular world. But introspection and greater and greater internalization of conscience mark the entire history of Christian asceticism, where their intensification is clearly connected with writing, from St Augustine's Confessions to the Autobiography of St Thrse of Lisieux (187397). Miller and Johnson (1938, p. 461), quoted by Watt, note that `almost every literate Puritan kept some sort of journal'. The advent of print intensified the inwardness fostered by script. The age of print was immediately marked in Protestant circles by advocacy of private, individual interpretation of the Bible, and in Catholic circles was marked by the

150 orality and literacy
growth of frequent private confession of sins, and concomitantly a stress on the examination of conscience. The influence of writing and print on Christian asceticism cries for study. Writing and reading, as has been seen, are solo activities (though reading at first was often enough done communally). They engage the psyche in strenuous, interiorized, individualized thought of a sort inaccessible to oral folk. In the private worlds that they generate, the feeling for the `round' human character is born  deeply interiorized in motivation, powered mysteriously, but consistently, from within. First emerging in chirographically controlled ancient Greek drama, the `round' character is further developed in Shakespeare's age after the coming of print, and comes to its peak with the novel, when, after the advent of the Age of Romanticism, print is more fully interiorized (Ong 1971). Writing and print do not entirely do away with the flat character. In accordance with the principle that a new technology of the word reinforces the old while at the same time transforming it, writing cultures may in fact generate at certain points the epitome of type characters, that is, abstract characters. These occur in the morality plays of the late Middle Ages, which employ abstract virtues and vices as characters  type characters intensified as only writing can intensify them  and in the drama of the humors in the seventeenth century, which, as in Ben Jonson's Every Man in His Humor or Volpone, introduce slightly fleshed out virtues and vices as characters in more complex plots. Defoe, Richardson, Fielding, and other early novelists (Watt 1967, pp. 1921), and even at times Jane Austen, give characters names that type them: Lovelace, Heart-free, Allworthy, or Square. Late hightechnology, electronic cultures still produce type characters in regressive genres such as Westerns or in contexts of self-conscious humor (in the modern sense of this word). The Jolly Green Giant works well enough in advertising script because the anti-heroic epithet `jolly' advertises to adults that they are not to take this latterday fertility god seriously. The story of type characters and the complex ways they relate written fiction to oral tradition has not yet been told. Just as the deplotted story of the late-print or electronic age builds on classical plot and achieves its effect because of a sense that the plot is masked or missing, so in the same age the bizarrely hollowed

oral memory, the story line and characterization

151

characters that represent extreme states of consciousness, as in Kafka, Samuel Beckett or Thomas Pynchon, achieve their effects because of the contrast felt with their antecedents, the `round' characters of the classical novel. Such electronic-age characters would be inconceivable had narrative not gone through a `round' character stage. The development of the round character registers changes in consciousness that range far beyond the world of literature. Since Freud, the psychological and especially the psychoanalytic understanding of all personality structure has taken as its model something like the `round' character of fiction. Freud understands real human beings as psychologically structured like the dramatic character Oedipus, not like Achilles, and indeed like an Oedipus interpreted out of the world of nineteenth-century novels, more `round' than anything in ancient Greek literature. It would appear that the development of modern depth psychology parallels the development of the character in drama and the novel, both depending on the inward turning of the psyche produced by writing and intensified by print. Indeed, just as depth psychology looks for some obscure but highly significant deeper meaning hidden beneath the surface of ordinary life, so novelists from Jane Austen to Thackeray and Flaubert invite the reader to sense some truer meaning beneath the flawed or fraudulent surface they portray. The insights of `depth' psychology were impossible earlier for the same reasons that the fully `round' character of the nineteenth-century novel was not possible before its time. In both cases, textual organization of consciousness was required, though of course other forces were also in play  the movement away from the holist therapy of the `old' (pre-Pasteur) medicine and the need for a new holism, the democratization and privatization of culture (itself an effect of writing and, later, print), the rise of the so-called `nuclear' family or `family of affection' in place of the extended family organized to preserve the `line' of descent, advanced technology relating larger groups of persons more intimately to one another, and so on. But whatever these other forces behind the development of depth psychology, one major force was the new feeling for the human lifeworld and the human person occasioned by writing and print. Epithetically delineated characters do not yield well to psychoanalytic criticism, nor do characters delineated in a faculty psychology of

152 orality and literacy
competing `virtues' and `vices'. Insofar as modern psychology and the `round' character of fiction represent to present-day consciousness what human existence is like, the feeling for human existence has been processed through writing and print. This is by no means to fault the present-day feeling for human existence. Quite the contrary. The present-day phenomenological sense of existence is richer in its conscious and articulate reflection than anything that preceded it. But it is salutary to recognize that this sense depends on the technologies of writing and print, deeply interiorized, made a part of our own psychic resources. The tremendous store of historical, psychological and other knowledge which can go into sophisticated narrative and characterization today could be accumulated only through the use of writing and print (and now electronics). But these technologies of the word do not merely store what we know. They style what we know in ways which made it quite inaccessible and indeed unthinkable in an oral culture.

